1	θεοὺς μὲν αἰτῶ τῶνδ’ ἀπαλλαγὴν πόνων φρουρᾶς ἐτείας μῆκος , ἣν κοιμώμενος στέγαις Ἀτρειδῶν ἄγκαθεν , κυνὸς δίκην , ἄστρων κάτοιδα νυκτέρων ὁμήγυριν , καὶ τοὺς φέροντας χεῖμα καὶ θέρος βροτοῖς λαμπροὺς δυνάστας , ἐμπρέποντας αἰθέρι ἀστέρας , ὅταν φθίνωσιν , ἀντολάς τε τῶν .	
Release from this weary task of mine has been my plea to the gods throughout this long year’s watch, in which, lying upon the palace roof of the Atreidae, upon my bent arm, like a dog, I have learned to know well the gathering of the night’s stars, those radiant potentates conspicuous in the firmament, bringers of winter and summer to mankind the constellations, when they rise and set.

2	καὶ νῦν φυλάσσω λαμπάδος τό σύμβολον , αὐγὴν πυρὸς φέρουσαν ἐκ Τροίας φάτιν ἁλώσιμόν τε βάξιν ·	
So now I am still watching for the signal-flame, the gleaming fire that is to bring news from Troy and tidings of its capture.

3	ὧδε γὰρ κρατεῖ γυναικὸς ἀνδρόβουλον ἐλπίζον κέαρ .	
For thus commands my queen, woman in passionate heart and man in strength of purpose.

4	εὖτ’ ἂν δὲ νυκτίπλαγκτον ἔνδροσόν τ’ ἔχω εὐνὴν ὀνείροις οὐκ ἐπισκοπουμένην ἐμήν ·	
And whenever I make here my bed, restless and dank with dew and unvisited by dreams—

5	φόβος γὰρ ἀνθ’ ὕπνου παραστατεῖ , τὸ μὴ βεβαίως βλέφαρα συμβαλεῖν ὕπνῳ ·	
for instead of sleep fear stands ever by my side, so that I cannot close my eyelids fast in sleep—

6	ὅταν δ’ ἀείδειν ἢ μινύρεσθαι δοκῶ , ὕπνου τόδ’ ἀντίμολπον ἐντέμνων ἄκος , κλαίω τότ’ οἴκου τοῦδε συμφορὰν στένων οὐχ ὡς τὰ πρόσθ’ ἄριστα δι

απονουμένου .  
and whenever I care to sing or hum (and thus apply an antidote of song to ward off drowsiness), then my tears start forth, as I bewail the fortunes of this house of ours, not ordered for the best as in days gone by.

7	νῦν δ’ εὐτυχὴς γένοιτ’ ἀπαλλαγὴ πόνων εὐαγγέλου φανέντος ὀρφναίου πυρός .  
But tonight may there come a happy release from my weary task! May the fire with its glad tidings flash through the gloom!

8	ὦ χαῖρε λαμπτὴρ νυκτός , ἡμερήσιον φάος πιφαύσκων καὶ χορῶν κατάστασιν πολλῶν ἐν Ἄργει , τῆσδε συμφορᾶς χάριν .  
The signal fire suddenly flashes out Oh welcome, you blaze in the night, a light as if of day, you harbinger of many a choral dance in Argos in thanksgiving for this glad event!

9	ἰοὺ ἰού .  
Hallo! Hallo!

10	Ἀγαμέμνονος γυναικὶ σημαίνω τορῶς εὐνῆς ἐπαντείλασαν ὡς τάχος δόμοις ὀλολυγμὸν εὐφημοῦντα τῇδε λαμπάδι ἐπορθιάζειν , εἴπερ Ἰλίου πόλις ἑάλωκεν , ὡς ὁ φρυκτὸς ἀγγέλλων πρέπει ·  
To Agamemnon’s queen I thus cry aloud the signal to rise from her bed, and as quickly as she can to lift up in her palace halls a shout of joy in welcome of this fire, if the city of Ilium truly is taken, as this beacon unmistakably announces.

11	αὐτός τ’ ἔγωγε φροίμιον χορεύσομαι .  
And I will make an overture with a dance upon my own account;

12	τὰ δεσποτῶν γὰρ εὖ πεσόντα θήσομαι τρὶς ἓξ βαλούσης τῆσδέ μοι φρυκτωρίας .  
for my lord’s lucky roll I shall count to my own score, now that this beacon has thrown me triple six.

13	γένοιτο δ’ οὖν μολόντος εὐφι

λῆ χέρα ἄνακτος οἴκων τῇδε βαστάσαι χερί .  
Ah well, may the master of the house come home and may I clasp his welcome hand in mine!

14	τὰ δ’ ἄλλα σιγῶ ·  
For the rest I stay silent;

15	βοῦς ἐπὶ γλώσσῃ μέγας βέβηκεν ·  
a great ox stands upon my tongue—

16	οἶκος δ’ αὐτός , εἰ φθογγὴν λάβοι , σαφέστατ’ ἂν λέξειεν ·  
yet the house itself, could it but speak, might tell a plain enough tale;

17	ὡς ἑκὼν ἐγὼ μαθοῦσιν αὐδῶ κ- οὐ μαθοῦσι λήθομαι .  
since, for my part, by my own choice I have words for those who know, and to those who do not know, I’ve lost my memory. 

18	δέκατον μὲν ἔτος τόδ’ ἐπεὶ Πριάμου μέγας ἀντίδικος , Μενέλαος ἄναξ ἠδ’ Ἀγαμέμνων , διθρόνου Διόθεν καὶ δισκήπτρου τιμῆς ὀχυρὸν ζεῦγος Ἀτρειδᾶν στόλον Ἀργείων χιλιοναύτην , τῆσδ’ ἀπὸ χώρας ἦραν , στρατιῶτιν ἀρωγὰν , μέγαν ἐκ θυμοῦ κλάζοντες Ἄρη τρόπον αἰγυπιῶν , οἵτ’ ἐκπατίοις ἄλγεσι παίδων ὕπατοι λεχέων στροφοδινοῦνται πτερύγων ἐρετμοῖσιν ἐρεσσόμενοι , δεμνιοτήρη πόνον ὀρταλίχων ὀλέσαντες ·  
This is now the tenth year since Priam’s mighty adversary, king Menelaus, and with him king Agamemnon, the mighty pair of Atreus’ sons, joined in honor of throne and sceptre by Zeus, set forth from this land with an army of a thousand ships manned by Argives, a warrior force to champion their cause. Loud rang the battle-cry they uttered in their rage, just as eagles scream which, in lonely grief for their brood, rowing with the oars of their wings, wheel high over their bed, because they have lost the toil of guarding their nurslings’ nest.

19	ὕπατος δ’ ἀίων ἤ τις Ἀπόλλων ἢ Πὰν ἢ Ζεὺς οἰωνόθροον γόον ὀξυβόαν τῶνδε μετοίκων ὑστερόποινον πέμπει παραβᾶσιν Ἐρινύν .  
But some one of the powers supreme—Apollo perhaps or Pan, or Zeus—hears the shrill wailing scream of the clamorous birds, these sojourners in his realm, and against the transgressors sends vengeance at last though late.

20	οὕτω δ’ Ἀτρέως παῖδας ὁ κρείσσων ἐπ’ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ πέμπει ξένιος Ζεὺς πολυάνορος ἀμφὶ γυναικὸς πολλὰ παλαίσματα καὶ γυιοβαρῆ γόνατος κονίαισιν ἐρειδομένου διακναιομένης τ’ ἐν προτελείοις κάμακος θήσων Δαναοῖσι Τρωσί θ’ ὁμοίως .	
Even so Zeus, whose power is over all, Zeus, lord of host and guest, sends against Alexander the sons of Atreus, that for the sake of a woman with many husbands he may inflict many and wearying struggles (when the knee is pressed in the dust and the spear is splintered in the onset) on Danaans and on Trojans alike.

21	ἔστι δ’ ὅπη νῦν ἔστι ·	
The case now stands where it stands—

22	τελεῖται δ’ ἐς τὸ πεπρωμένον ·	
it moves to fulfilment at its destined end.

23	οὔθ’ ὑποκαίων οὔθ’ ὑπολείβων οὔτε δακρύων ἀπύρων ἱερῶν ὀργὰς ἀτενεῖς παραθέλξει .	
Not by offerings burned in secret, not by secret libations, not by tears, shall man soften the stubborn wrath of unsanctified sacrifices.

24	ἡμεῖς δ’ ἀτίται σαρκὶ παλαιᾷ τῆς τότ’ ἀρωγῆς ὑπολειφθέντες μίμνομεν ἰσχὺν ἰσόπαιδα νέμοντες ἐπὶ σκήπτροις .	
But we, incapable of service by reason of our aged frame, discarded from that martial mustering of long ago, wait here at home, supporting on our canes a strength like a child’s.

25	ὅ τε γὰρ νεαρὸς μυελὸς στέρνων ἐντὸς ἀνᾴσσων ἰσόπρεσβυς , Ἄρης δ’ οὐκ ἔνι χώρᾳ , τό θ’ ὑπέργηρων φυλλάδος ἤδη κατακαρφομένης τρίποδας μὲν ὁδοὺς στείχει , παιδὸς δ’ οὐδὲν ἀρείων ὄναρ ἡμερόφαντον ἀλαίνει .  
For just as the vigor of youth, leaping up within the breast, is like that of old age, since the war-god is not in his place; so extreme age, its leaves already withering, goes its way on triple feet, and, no better than a child, wanders, a dream that is dreamed by day.

26	σὺ δέ , Τυνδάρεω θύγατερ , βασίλεια Κλυταιμήστρα , τί χρέος ;  
But, O daughter of Tyndareos, Queen Clytaemestra, what has happened?

27	τί νέον ;  
What news do you have?

28	τί δ’ ἐπαισθομένη , τίνος ἀγγελίας πειθοῖ περίπεμπτα θυοσκεῖς ;  
On what intelligence and convinced by what report do you send about your messengers to command sacrifice?

29	πάντων δὲ θεῶν τῶν ἀστυνόμων , ὑπάτων , χθονίων , τῶν τ’ οὐρανίων τῶν τ’ ἀγοραίων , βωμοὶ δώροισι φλέγονται ·  
For all the gods our city worships, the gods supreme, the gods below, the gods of the heavens and of the marketplace, have their altars ablaze with offerings.

30	ἄλλη δ’ ἄλλοθεν οὐρανομήκης λαμπὰς ἀνίσχει , φαρμασσομένη χρίματος ἁγνοῦ μαλακαῖς ἀδόλοισι παρηγορίαις , πελάνῳ μυχόθεν βασιλείῳ .  
Now here, now there, the flames rise high as heaven, yielding to the soft and guileless persuasion of holy ointment, the sacrificial oil itself brought from the inner chambers of the palace.

31	τούτων λέξασ’ ὅ τι καὶ δυνατὸν καὶ θέμις αἰνεῖν , παιών τε γενοῦ τῆσδε μερίμνης , ἣ νῦν τοτὲ μὲν κακόφρων τελέθει , τοτὲ δ’ ἐκ θυσιῶν ἀγανὴ φαίνουσ’ ἐλπὶς ἀμύνει φροντίδ’ ἄπληστον τῆς θυμοβόρου φρένα λύπης .  
Of all this declare whatever you can and dare reveal, and be a healer of my uneasy heart. This now at one moment bodes ill, while then again hope, shining with kindly light from the sacrifices, wards off the biting care of the sorrow that gnaws my heart.

32	κύριός εἰμι θροεῖν ὅδιον κράτος αἴσιον ἀνδρῶν ἐκτελέων ·  
I have the power to proclaim the augury of triumph given on their way to princely men—

33	ἔτι γὰρ θεόθεν καταπνεύει πειθὼ μολπᾶν ἀλκὰν σύμφυτος αἰών ·  
since my age still breathes Persuasion upon me from the gods, the strength of song—

34	ὅπως Ἀχαιῶν δίθρονον κράτος , Ἑλλάδος ἥβας ξύμφρονα ταγάν , πέμπει σὺν δορὶ καὶ χερὶ πράκτορι θούριος ὄρνις Τευκρίδ’ ἐπ’ αἶαν , οἰωνῶν βασιλεὺς βασιλεῦσι νεῶν ὁ κελαινός , ὅ τ’ ἐξόπιν ἀργᾶς , φανέντες ἴκταρ μελάθρων χερὸς ἐκ δοριπάλτου παμπρέπτοις ἐν ἕδραισιν , βοσκόμενοι λαγίναν , ἐρικύμονα φέρματι

γένναν , βλαβέντα λοισθίων δρόμων .  
how the twin-throned command of the Achaeans, the single-minded captains of Hellas’ youth, with avenging spear and arm against the Teucrian land, was sent off by the inspiring omen appearing to the kings of the ships—kingly birds, one black, one white of tail, near the palace, on the spear-hand, in a conspicuous place, devouring a hare with offspring unborn caught in the last effort to escape.

35	αἴλινον αἴλινον εἰπέ , τὸ δ’ εὖ νικάτω .  
Sing the song of woe, the song of woe, but may the good prevail!

36	κεδνὸς δὲ στρατόμαντις ἰδὼν δύο λήμασι δισσοὺς Ἀτρεΐδας μαχίμους ἐδάη λαγοδαίτας πομπούς τ’ ἀρχάς ·  
Then the wise seer of the host, noticing how the two warlike sons of Atreus were two in temper, recognized the devourers of the hare as the leaders of the army,

37	οὕτω δ’ εἶπε τερᾴζων ·  
and thus interpreted the portent and spoke:

38	χρόνῳ μὲν ἀγρεῖ Πριάμου πόλιν ἅδε κέλευθος , πάντα δὲ πύργων κτήνη πρόσθε τὰ δημιοπληθῆ Μοῖρ’ ἀλαπάξει πρὸς τὸ βίαιον ·  
In time those who here issue forth shall seize Priam’s town, and fate shall violently ravage before its towered walls all the public store of cattle.

39	οἶον μή τις ἄγα θεόθεν κνεφάσῃ προτυπὲν στόμιον μέγα Τροίας στρατωθέν .οἴκτῳ γὰρ ἐπίφθονος Ἄρτεμις ἁγνὰ πτανοῖσιν κυσὶ πατρὸς αὐτότοκον πρὸ λόχου μογερὰν πτάκα θυομένοισιν στυγεῖ δὲ δεῖπνον αἰετῶν .  
Only may no jealous god-sent wrath cast its shadow upon the embattled host, the mighty bit forged for Troy’s mouth, and strike it before it reaches its goal! For, in her pity, holy Artemis is angry at the winged hounds of her father, for they sacrifice a wretched timorous thing, together with her young, before she has brought them forth. An abomination to her is the eagles’ feast.

40	αἴλινον αἴλινον εἰπέ , τὸ δ’ εὖ νικάτω .  
Sing the song of woe, the song of woe, but may the good prevail!

41	τόσον περ εὔφρων , καλά , δρόσοισι λεπτοῖς μαλερῶν λεόντων πάντων τ’ ἀγρονόμων φιλομάστοις θηρῶν ὀβρικάλοισι τερπνά , τούτων αἴνει ξύμβολα κρᾶναι , δεξιὰ μέν , κατάμομφα δὲ φάσματα στρουθῶν .  
Although, O Lovely One, you are so gracious to the tender whelps of fierce lions, and take delight in the suckling young of every wild creature that roams the field, promise that the issue be brought to pass in accordance with these signs, portents auspicious yet filled with ill.

42	ἰήιον δὲ καλέω Παιᾶνα , μή τινας ἀντιπνόους Δαναοῖς χρονίας ἐχενῇδας ἀπλοίας τεύξῃ , σπευδομένα θυσίαν ἑτέραν ἄνομόν τιν’ , ἄδαιτον

νεικέων τέκτονα σύμφυτον , οὐ δεισήνορα .  
And I implore Paean, the healer, that she may not raise adverse gales with long delay to stay the Danaan fleet from putting forth, by urging another sacrifice, one that knows no law, unsuited for feast, worker of family strife, dissolving wife’s reverence for husband.

43	μίμνει γὰρ φοβερὰ παλίνορτος οἰκονόμος δολία μνάμων μῆνις τεκνόποινος .  
For there abides wrath—terrible, not to be suppressed, a treacherous guardian of the home, a wrath that never forgets and that exacts vengeance for a child.

44	τοιάδε Κάλχας ξὺν μεγάλοις ἀγαθοῖς ἀπέκλαγξεν μόρσιμ’ ἀπ’ ὀρνίθων ὁδίων οἴκοις βασιλείοις ·  
Such utterances of doom, derived from auguries on the march, together with many blessings, did Calchas proclaim to the royal house;

45	τοῖς δ’ ὁμόφωνον αἴλινον αἴλινον εἰπέ , τὸ δ’ εὖ νικάτω .  
and in harmony with this, Sing the song of woe, the song of woe, but may the good prevail!


46 Ζεύς , ὅστις ποτ’ ἐστίν , εἰ τόδ’ αὐτῷ φίλον κεκλημένῳ , τοῦτό νιν προσεννέπω .
Zeus, whoever he may be,—if by this name it pleases him to be invoked, by this name I call to him—


47 οὐκ ἔχω προσεικάσαι πάντ’ ἐπισταθμώμενος πλὴν Διός , εἰ τὸ μάταν ἀπὸ φροντίδος ἄχθος χρὴ βαλεῖν ἐτητύμως .
—as I weigh all things in the balance, I have nothing to compare save Zeus, if in truth I must cast aside this vain burden from my heart.

48	οὐδ’ ὅστις πάροιθεν ἦν μέγας , παμμάχῳ θράσει βρύων , οὐδὲ λέξεται πρὶν ὤν ·  
He who once was mighty, swelling with insolence for every fight, he shall not even be named as having ever existed;

49	ὃς δ’ ἔπειτ’ ἔφυ , τριακτῆρος οἴχεται τυχών .  
and he who arose later, he has met his overthrower and is past and gone.

50	Ζῆνα δέ τις προφρόνως ἐπινίκια κλάζων τεύξεται φρενῶν τὸ πᾶν ·  
But whoever willingly sings a victory song for Zeus, he shall gain wisdom altogether;

51	τὸν φρονεῖν βροτοὺς ὁδώσαντα , τὸν πάθει μάθος θέντα κυρίως ἔχειν .  
Zeus, who sets mortals on the path to understanding, Zeus, who has established as a fixed law that wisdom comes by suffering.

52	στάζει δ’ ἔν θ’ ὕπνῳ πρὸ καρδίας μνησιπήμων πόνος ·  
But even as trouble, bringing memory of pain, drips over the mind in sleep,

53	καὶ παρ’ ἄκοντας ἦλθε σωφρονεῖν .  
so wisdom comes to men, whether they want it or not. Harsh, it seems to me, is the grace of gods enthroned upon their awful seats.

54	δαιμόνων δέ που χάρις βίαιος σέλμα σεμνὸν ἡμένων .  
For there abides wrath—terrible, not to be suppressed, a treacherous guardian of the home, a wrath that never forgets and that exacts vengeance for a child.

55	καὶ τόθ’ ἡγεμὼν ὁ πρέσβυς νεῶν Ἀχαιικῶν , μάντιν οὔτινα ψέγων , ἐμπαίοις τύχαισι συμπνέων , εὖτ’ ἀπλοίᾳ κεναγγεῖ βαρύνοντ’ Ἀχαιικὸς λεώς , Χαλκίδος πέραν ἔχων παλιρρόχθοις ἐν Αὐλίδος τόποις ·  
So then the captain of the Achaean ships, the elder of the two—holding no seer at fault, bending to the adverse blasts of fortune, when the Achaean folk, on the shore over against Chalcis in the region where Aulis’ tides surge to and fro, were very distressed by opposing winds and failing stores.

56	πνοαὶ δ’ ἀπὸ Στρυμόνος μολοῦσαι κακόσχολοι νήστιδες δύσορμοι , βροτῶν ἄλαι , ναῶν τε καὶ πεισμάτων ἀφειδεῖς , παλιμμήκη χρόνον τιθεῖσαι τρίβῳ κατέξαινον ἄνθος Ἀργείων ·
The breezes that blew from the Strymon, bringing harmful leisure, hunger, and tribulation of spirit in a cruel port, idle wandering of men, and sparing neither ship nor cable, began, by doubling the season of their stay, to rub away and wither the flower of Argos;

57	ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ πικροῦ χείματος ἄλλο μῆχαρ βριθύτερον πρόμοισιν μάντις ἔκλαγξεν προφέρων Ἄρτεμιν , ὥστε χθόνα βάκτροις ἐπικρούσαντας Ἀτρείδας δάκρυ μὴ κατασχεῖν ·
And when the seer, pointing to Artemis as cause, proclaimed to the chieftains another remedy, more oppressive even than the bitter storm, so that the sons of Atreus struck the ground with their canes and did not stifle their tears—

58	ἄναξ δ’ ὁ πρέσβυς τότ’ εἶπε φωνῶν ·
Then the elder king spoke and said:

59	βαρεῖα μὲν κὴρ τὸ μὴ πιθέσθαι , βαρεῖα δ’ , εἰ τέκνον δαΐξω , δόμων ἄγαλμα , μιαίνων παρθενοσφάγοισιν ῥείθροις πατρῴους χέρας πέλας βωμοῦ ·
It is a hard fate to refuse obedience, and hard, if I must slay my child, the glory of my home, and at the altar-side stain
a father’s hand with streams of virgin’s blood. 


60	τί τῶνδ’ ἄνευ κακῶν , πῶς λιπόναυς γένωμαι ξυμμαχίας ἁμαρτών ;
Which of these courses is not filled with evil? How can I become a deserter to my fleet and fail my allies in arms?

61	παυσανέμου γὰρ θυσίας παρθενίου θ’ αἵματος ὀργᾷ περιόργως ἐπιθυμεῖν θέμις .
For that they should with all too impassioned passion crave a sacrifice to lull the winds—even a virgin’s blood—stands within their right. 

62	εὖ γὰρ εἴη .
May all be for the best.

63	ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀνάγκας ἔδυ λέπαδνον φρενὸς πνέων δυσσεβῆ τροπαίαν ἄναγνον ἀνίερον , τόθεν τὸ παντότολμον φρονεῖν μετέγνω .
But when he had donned the yoke of Necessity, with veering of mind, impious, unholy, unsanctified, from that moment he changed his intention and began to conceive that deed of uttermost audacity.

64	βροτοὺς θρασύνει γὰρ αἰσχρόμητις τάλαινα παρακοπὰ πρωτοπήμων .
For wretched delusion, counsellor of ill, primal source of woe, makes mortals bold.

65	ἔτλα δ’ οὖν θυτὴρ γενέσθαι θυγατρός , γυναικοποίνων πολέμων ἀρωγὰν καὶ προτέλεια ναῶν .
So then he hardened his heart to sacrifice his daughter so that he might further a war waged to avenge a woman, and as an offering for the voyage of a fleet!

66	λιτὰς δὲ καὶ κληδόνας πατρῴους παρ’ οὐδὲν αἰῶ τε παρθένειον ἔθεντο φιλόμαχοι βραβῆς .
For her supplications, her cries of Father, and her virgin life,
the commanders in their eagerness for war cared nothing. 

67	φράσεν δ’ ἀόζοις πατὴρ μετ’ εὐχὰν δίκαν χιμαίρας ὕπερθε βωμοῦ πέπλοισι περιπετῆ παντὶ θυμῷ προνωπῆ λαβεῖν ἀέρδην , στόματός τε καλλιπρῴρου φυλακᾷ κατασχεῖν φθόγγον ἀραῖον οἴκοις ,
Her father, after a prayer, bade his ministers lay hold of her as, enwrapped in her robes, she lay fallen forward,
and with stout heart to raise her, as if she were a young goat, high above the altar; and with a gag upon her lovely mouth to hold back the shouted curse against her house—

68	βίᾳ χαλινῶν τ’ ἀναύδῳ μένει .
by the bit’s strong and stifling might.

69	κρόκου βαφὰς δ’ ἐς πέδον χέουσα ἔβαλλ’ ἕκαστον θυτήρων ἀπ’ ὄμματος βέλει φιλοίκτῳ , πρέπουσά θ’ ὡς ἐν γραφαῖς , προσεννέπειν θέλουσ’ , ἐπεὶ πολλάκις πατρὸς κατ’ ἀνδρῶνας εὐτραπέζους ἔμελψεν , ἁγνᾷ δ’ ἀταύρωτος αὐδᾷ πατρὸς φίλου τριτόσπονδον εὔποτμον παιῶνα φίλως ἐτίμα —
Then, as she shed to earth her saffron robe, she
struck each of her sacrificers with a glance from her eyes beseeching pity, looking as if in a picture, wishing she could speak; for she had often sung where men met at her father’s hospitable table, and with her virgin voice would lovingly honor her dear father’s prayer for blessing at the third libation[*]—
70	τὰ δ’ ἔνθεν οὔτ’ εἶδον οὔτ’ ἐννέπω ·
What happened next I did not see and do not tell.

71	τέχναι δὲ Κάλχαντος οὐκ ἄκραντοι .
The art of Calchas was not unfulfilled.

72	Δίκα δὲ τοῖς μὲν παθοῦσιν μαθεῖν ἐπιρρέπει ·
Justice inclines her scales so that wisdom comes at the price of suffering.

73	τὸ μέλλον δ’ , ἐπεὶ γένοιτ’ , ἂν κλύοις ·
But the future, that you shall know when it occurs;

74	πρὸ χαιρέτω ·
till then, leave it be—

75	ἴσον δὲ τῷ προστένειν .
it is just as someone weeping ahead of time.

76	τορὸν γὰρ ἥξει σύνορθρον αὐγαῖς .
Clear it will come, together with the light of dawn.

77	πέλοιτο δ’ οὖν τ- ἐπὶ τούτοισιν εὖ πρᾶξις , ὡς θέλει τόδ’ ἄγχιστον Ἀπίας γαίας μονόφρουρον ἕρκος .
But as for what shall follow, may the issue be happy, even as she wishes, our sole guardian here, the bulwark of the Apian land, who stands nearest to our lord.

78	ἥκω σεβίζων σόν , Κλυταιμήστρα , κράτος ·
I have come, Clytaemestra, in obedience to your royal authority;

79	δίκη γάρ ἐστι φωτὸς ἀρχηγοῦ τίειν γυναῖκ’ ἐρημωθέντος ἄρσενος θρόνου .
for it is fitting to do homage to the consort of a sovereign prince when her husband’s throne is empty.

80	σὺ δ’ εἴ τι κεδνὸν εἴτε μὴ πεπυσμένη εὐαγγέλοισιν ἐλπίσιν θυηπολεῖς , κλύοιμ’ ἂν εὔφρων ·
Now whether the news you have heard is good or ill, and you do make sacrifice with hopes that herald gladness, I wish to hear;

81	οὐδὲ σιγώσῃ φθόνος .
yet, if you would keep silence, I make no complaint.

82 εὐάγγελος μέν , ὥσπερ ἡ παροιμία , ἕως γένοιτο μητρὸς εὐφρόνης πάρα .
As herald of gladness, with the proverb, may Dawn be born from her mother Night!

83 πεύσῃ δὲ χάρμα μεῖζον ἐλπίδος κλύειν ·
You shall hear joyful news surpassing all your hopes: 


82 εὐάγγελος μέν , ὥσπερ ἡ παροιμία , ἕως γένοιτο μητρὸς εὐφρόνης πάρα .
As herald of gladness, with the proverb, may Dawn be born from her mother Night!

83 πεύσῃ δὲ χάρμα μεῖζον ἐλπίδος κλύειν ·
You shall hear joyful news surpassing all your hopes: the Argives have taken Priam’s town!

84 Πριάμου γὰρ ᾑρήκασιν Ἀργεῖοι πόλιν .
the Argives have taken Priam’s town!

85	πῶς φής ;
What have you said?

86	πέφευγε τ- ἔπος ἐξ ἀπιστίας .
The meaning of your words has escaped me, so incredible they seemed.

87	Τροίαν Ἀχαιῶν οὖσαν ·
I said that Troy is in the hands of the Achaeans.

88	ἦ τορῶς λέγω ;
Is my meaning clear?

89	χαρά μ’ ὑφέρπει δάκρυον ἐκκαλουμένη .
Joy steals over me, and it challenges my tears.

90	εὖ γὰρ φρονοῦντος ὄμμα σοῦ κατηγορεῖ .
Sure enough, for your eye betrays your loyal heart.

91	τί γὰρ τὸ πιστόν ;
What then is the proof?

92	ἔστι τῶνδέ σοι τέκμαρ ;
Have you evidence of this?

93	ἔστιν ·
I have, indeed;

94	τί δ’ οὐχί ;
How not?


95	μὴ δολώσαντος θεοῦ .
unless some god has played me false.


96	πότερα δ’ ὀνείρων φάσματ’ εὐπιθῆ σέβεις ;
Do you believe the persuasive visions of dreams?


97	οὐ δόξαν ἂν λάβοιμι βριζούσης φρενός .
I would not heed the fancies of a slumbering brain.

98	ἀλλ’ ἦ σ’ ἐπίανέν τις ἄπτερος φάτις ;
But can it be some pleasing rumor that has fed your hopes?


99	παιδὸς νέας ὣς κάρτ’ ἐμωμήσω φρένας .
Truly you scorn my understanding as if it were a child’s.



100	ποίου χρόνου δὲ καὶ πεπόρθηται πόλις ;
But at what time was the city destroyed?



101	τῆς νῦν τεκούσης φῶς τόδ’ εὐφρόνης λέγω .
In the night, I say, that has but now given birth to this day here.

102	καὶ τίς τόδ’ ἐξίκοιτ’ ἂν ἀγγέλων τάχος ;	
And what messenger could reach here with such speed?

103	Ἥφαιστος Ἴδης λαμπρὸν ἐκπέμπων σέλας .
Hephaestus, from Ida speeding forth his brilliant blaze.

104	φρυκτὸς δὲ φρυκτὸν δεῦρ’ ἀπ’ ἀγγάρου πυρὸς ἔπεμπεν ·
Beacon passed beacon on to us by courier-flame:

105	Ἴδη μὲν πρὸς Ἑρμαῖον λέπας Λήμνου ·
Ida, to the Hermaean crag in Lemnos;

106	μέγαν δὲ πανὸν ἐκ νήσου τρίτον Ἀθῷον αἶπος Ζηνὸς ἐξεδέξατο , ὑπερτελής τε , πόντον ὥστε νωτίσαι , ἰσχὺς πορευτοῦ λαμπάδος πρὸς ἡδονὴν πεύκη τὸ χρυσοφεγγές , ὥς τις ἥλιος , σέλας παραγγείλασα Μακίστου σκοπαῖς ·
to the mighty blaze upon the island succeeded, third, the summit of Athos sacred to Zeus; and, soaring high aloft so as to leap across the sea, the flame, travelling joyously onward in its strength.

107	ὁ δ’ οὔτι μέλλων οὐδ’ ἀφρασμόνως ὕπνῳ νικώμενος παρῆκεν ἀγγέλου μέρος ·
He, delaying not nor carelessly overcome by sleep, did not neglect his part as messenger.

108	ἑκὰς δὲ φρυκτοῦ φῶς ἐπ’ Εὐρίπου ῥοὰς Μεσσαπίου φύλαξι σημαίνει μολόν .
Far over Euripus’ stream came the beacon-light and signalled to the watchmen on Messapion.

109	οἱ δ’ ἀντέλαμψαν καὶ παρήγγειλαν πρόσω γραίας ἐρείκης θωμὸν ἅψαντες πυρί .
They, kindling a heap of withered heather, lit up their answering blaze and sped the message on.

110	σθένουσα λαμπὰς δ’ οὐδέπω μαυρουμένη , ὑπερθοροῦσα πεδίον Ἀσωποῦ , δίκην φαιδρᾶς σελήνης , πρὸς Κιθαιρῶνος λέπας ἤγειρεν ἄλλην ἐκδοχὴν πομποῦ πυρός .
The flame, now gathering strength and in no way dimmed, like a radiant moon overleaped the plain

of Asopus to Cithaeron’s ridges, and roused another relay of missive fire.

111	φάος δὲ τηλέπομπον οὐκ ἠναίνετο φρουρὰ πλέον καίουσα τῶν εἰρημένων ·
Nor did the warders there disdain the far-flung light, but made a blaze higher than their commands.

112	λίμνην δ’ ὑπὲρ Γοργῶπιν ἔσκηψεν φάος ·
Across Gorgopus’ water shot the light,

113	ὄρος τ’ ἐπ’ Αἰγίπλαγκτον ἐξικνούμενον ὤτρυνε θεσμὸν μὴ χρονίζεσθαι πυρός .
reached the mount of Aegiplanctus, and urged the ordinance of fire to make no delay.

114	πέμπουσι δ’ ἀνδαίοντες ἀφθόνῳ μένει φλογὸς μέγαν πώγωνα , καὶ Σαρωνικοῦ πορθμοῦ κάτοπτον πρῶν’ ὑπερβάλλειν πρόσω φλέγουσαν ·
Kindling high with unstinted force a mighty beard of flame, they sped it forward so that, as it blazed, it passed even the headland that looks upon the Saronic gulf;

115	ἔστ’ ἔσκηψεν εὖτ’ ἀφίκετο Ἀραχναῖον αἶπος , ἀστυγείτονας σκοπάς ·
until it swooped down when it reached the lookout, near to our city, upon the peak of Arachnaeus;

116	κ- ἔπειτ’ Ἀτρειδῶν ἐς τόδε σκήπτει στέγος φάος τόδ’

οὐκ ἄπαππον Ἰδαίου πυρός .
and next upon this roof of the Atreidae it leapt, this very fire not undescended from the Idaean flame.

117	τοιοίδε τοί μοι λαμπαδηφόρων νόμοι , ἄλλος παρ’ ἄλλου διαδοχαῖς πληρούμενοι ·
Such are the torch-bearers I have arranged, completing the course in succession one to the other;

118	νικᾷ δ’ ὁ πρῶτος καὶ τελευταῖος δραμών .
and the victor is he who ran both first and last.

119	τέκμαρ τοιοῦτον σύμβολόν τέ σοι λέγω ἀνδρὸς παραγγείλαντος ἐκ Τροίας ἐμοί .
This is the kind of proof and token I give you, the message of my husband from Troy to me.

120	θεοῖς μὲν αὖθις , ὦ γύναι , προσεύξομαι .
Lady, my prayers of thanksgiving to the gods I will offer soon. 

121	λόγους δ’ ἀκοῦσαι τούσδε κ- ἀποθαυμάσαι διηνεκῶς θέλοιμ’ ἂν ὡς λέγοις πάλιν .
But as I would like to hear and satisfy my wonder at your tale straight through to the end, so may you tell it yet again.

122	Τροίαν Ἀχαιοὶ τῇδ’ ἔχουσ’ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ .
This day the Achaeans hold Troy.

123	οἶμαι βοὴν ἄμεικτον ἐν πόλει πρέπειν .
Within the town there sounds, I believe, a clamor of voices which will not blend.

124	ὄξος τ’ ἄλειφά τ’ ἐγχέας τ- αὐτῷ κύτει διχοστατοῦντ’ ἄν , οὐ φίλω , προσεννέποις .
Pour vinegar and oil into the same vessel and you will say that, as foes, they keep apart;

125	καὶ τῶν ἁλόντων καὶ κρατησάντων δίχα φθογγὰς ἀκούειν ἔστι συμφορᾶς διπλῆς .
so the cries of vanquished and victors greet the ear, distinct as their fortunes are diverse.

126	οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἀμφὶ σώμασιν πεπτωκότες ἀνδρῶν κασιγνήτων τε καὶ φυταλμίων παῖδες γερόντων οὐκέτ’ ἐξ ἐλευθέρου δέρης ἀποιμώζουσι φιλτάτων μόρον ·
Those, flung upon the corpses of their husbands and their brothers, children upon the bodies of their aged fathers who gave them life, bewail from lips no longer free the death of their dearest ones,

127	τοὺς δ’ αὖτε νυκτίπλαγκτος ἐκ μάχης πόνος νήστεις πρὸς ἀρίστοισιν ὧν ἔχει πόλις τάσσει , πρὸς οὐδὲν ἐν μέρει τεκμήριον , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἕκαστος ἔσπασεν τύχης πάλον .
while these—a night of restless toil after battle sets them down famished to break their fast on such fare as the town affords; not faring according to rank, but as each man has drawn his lot by chance.

128	ἐν δ’ αἰχμαλώτοις Τρωικοῖς οἰκήμασιν ναίουσιν ἤδη , τῶν ὑπαιθρίων πάγων δρόσων τ’ ἀπαλλαγέντες , ὡς δ’ εὐδαίμονες ἀφύλακτον εὑδήσουσι πᾶσαν εὐφρόνην .
And even now they are quartered in the captured Trojan homes, delivered from the frosts and dew of the naked sky, and like happy men will sleep all the night without a guard.

129	εἰ δ’ εὖ σέβουσι τοὺς πολισσούχους θεοὺς τοὺς τῆς ἁλούσης γῆς θεῶν θ’ ἱδρύματα

 , οὔ τ- ἂν ἑλόντες αὖθις ἀνθαλοῖεν ἄν .
Now if they keep clear of guilt towards the gods of the town—those of the conquered land—and towards their shrines, the captors shall not be made captives in their turn.

130	ἔρως δὲ μή τις πρότερον ἐμπίπτῃ στρατῷ πορθεῖν ἃ μὴ χρή , κέρδεσιν νικωμένους .
Only may no mad impulse first assail the army, overmastered by greed, to pillage what they should not!

131	δεῖ γὰρ πρὸς οἴκους νοστίμου σωτηρίας κάμψαι διαύλου θάτερον κῶλον πάλιν ·
For to win safe passage home they need to travel back the other length of their double course.

132	θεοῖς δ’ ἀναμπλάκητος εἰ μόλοι στρατός , ἐγρηγορὸς τὸ πῆμα τῶν ὀλωλότων γένοιτ’ ἄν , εἰ πρόσπαια μὴ τύχοι κακά .
But even if, without having offended the gods, our troops should reach home, the grievous suffering of the dead might still remain awake—if no fresh disaster transpires.

133	τοιαῦτά τοι γυναικὸς ἐξ ἐμοῦ κλύεις ·
These are my woman’s words;

134	τὸ δ’ εὖ κρατοίη μὴ διχορρόπως ἰδεῖν .
but may the good prevail clearly for all to see!

135	πολλῶν γὰρ ἐσθλῶν τήνδ’ ὄνησιν εἱλόμην .
For, choosing thus, I have chosen the enjoyment of many a blessing.

136 γύναι , κατ’ ἄνδρα σώφρον’ εὐφρόνως λέγεις .
Lady, you speak as wisely as a prudent man.

137 ἐγὼ δ’ ἀκούσας πιστά σου τεκμήρια θεοὺς προσειπεῖν εὖ παρασκευάζομαι .
And, for my part, now that I have listened to your certain proofs, I prepare to address due prayers of thanksgiving to the gods;

138 χάρις γὰρ οὐκ ἄτιμος εἴργασται πόνων .
for a success has been achieved that well repays the toil.

139 ὦ Ζεῦ βασιλεῦ καὶ νὺξ φιλία μεγάλων κόσμων κτεάτειρα , ἥτ’ ἐπὶ Τροίας πύργοις ἔβαλες στεγανὸν δίκτυον , ὡς μήτε μέγαν μήτ’ οὖν νεαρῶν τιν’ ὑπερτελέσαι μέγα δουλείας γάγγαμον , ἄτης παναλώτου .
Hail, sovereign Zeus, and you kindly Night, you who have given us great glory, you who cast your meshed snare upon the towered walls of Troy, so that neither old nor young could overleap the huge enslaving net of all-conquering Destruction.

140	Δία τοι ξένιον μέγαν αἰδοῦμαι τὸν τάδε πράξαντ’ ἐπ’ Ἀλεξάνδρῳ τείνοντα πάλαι τόξον , ὅπως ἂν μήτε πρὸ καιροῦ μήθ’ ὑπὲρ ἄστρων βέλος ἠλίθιον σκήψειεν .
Great Zeus it is, lord of host and guest, whom I revere—he has brought this to pass. He long kept his bow bent against Alexander until his bolt would neither fall short of the mark nor, flying beyond the stars, be launched in vain.

141	Διὸς πλαγὰν ἔχουσιν εἰπεῖν , πάρεστιν τοῦτό γ’ ἐξιχνεῦσαι .
The stroke of Zeus they may call it; his hand can be traced there. As he determines, so he acts.

142	ὡς ἔπραξεν ὡς ἔκρανεν .
Someone said that the gods do not trouble themselves to remember mortals who trample underfoot the grace of things not to be touched.

143	οὐκ ἔφα τις θεοὺς βροτῶν ἀξιοῦσθαι μέλειν ὅσοις ἀθίκτων χάρις πατοῖθ’ ·
But that man was impious!

144	ὁ δ’ οὐκ εὐσεβής .
Now it stands revealed!

145	πέφανται δ’ ἐκτίνουσ’ ἀτολμήτων ἀρὴ πνεόντων μεῖζον ἢ δικαίως , φλεόντων δωμάτων ὑπέρφευ ὑπὲρ τὸ βέλτιστον .
The penalty for reckless crime is ruin when men breathe a spirit of pride above just measure, because their mansions teem with more abundance than is good for them.

146	ἔστω δ’ ἀπήμαντον , ὥστ’ ἀπαρκεῖν εὖ πραπίδων λαχόντα .
But let there be such wealth as brings no distress, enough to satisfy a sensible man.

147	οὐ γὰρ ἔστιν ἔπαλξις πλούτου πρὸς κόρον ἀνδρὶ λακτίσαντι μέγαν Δίκας βωμὸν εἰς ἀφάνειαν .
For riches do not protect the man who in wantonness has kicked the mighty altar of Justice into obscurity.

148 βιᾶται δ’ ἁ τάλαινα πειθώ , προβούλου παῖς ἄφερτος ἄτας .
Perverse Temptation, the overmastering child of designing Destruction, drives men on; and every remedy is futile.

149 ἄκος δὲ πᾶν μάταιον .
His evil is not hidden; it shines forth, a baleful gleam.

150 οὐκ ἐκρύφθη , πρέπει δέ , φῶς αἰνολαμπές , σίνος ·
Like base metal beneath the touchstone’s rub, when tested he shows the blackness of his grain,

151 κακοῦ δὲ χαλκοῦ τρόπον τρίβῳ τε καὶ προσβολαῖς μελαμπαγὴς πέλει δικαιωθείς , ἐπεὶ διώκει παῖς ποτανὸν ὄρνιν , πόλει πρόστριμμ’ ἄφερτον ἐνθείς .
(for he is like a child who chases a winged bird) and upon his people he brings a taint against which there is no defence.

152 λιτᾶν δ’ ἀκούει μὲν οὔτις θεῶν ·
No god listens to his prayers.

153 τὸν δ’ ἐπίστροφον τῶν φῶτ’ ἄδικον καθαιρεῖ .
The man associated with such deeds, him they destroy in his unrighteousness.

154 οἷος καὶ Πάρις ἐλθὼν ἐς δόμον τὸν Ἀτρειδᾶν ᾔσχυνε ξενίαν τράπεζαν κλοπαῖσι γυναικός .
And such was Paris, who came to the house of the sons of Atreus and dishonoured the hospitality of his host by stealing away a wedded wife.

155 λιποῦσα δ’ ἀστοῖσιν ἀσπίστοράς τε καὶ κλόνους λογχίμους ναυβάτας θ’ ὁπλισμούς , ἄγουσά τ’ ἀντίφερνον Ἰλίῳ φθορὰν βέβακεν ῥίμφα διὰ πυλᾶν ἄτλητα τλᾶσα ·
But she, bequeathing to her people the clang of shield and spear and army of fleets, and bringing to Ilium destruction in place of dowry, with light step she passed through the gates—daring a deed undareable.

156 πολλὰ δ’ ἔστενον τόδ’ ἐννέποντες δόμων προφῆται ·
Then loud wailed the seers of the house crying,

157 ἰὼ ἰὼ δῶμα δῶμα καὶ πρόμοι , ἰὼ λέχος καὶ στίβοι φιλάνορες .
"Alas, alas, for the home, the home, and for the princes! Alas for the husband’s bed and the impress of her form so dear!"

158	πάρεστι σιγὰς ἀτίμους ἀλοιδόρους ἄλγιστ’ ἀφημένων ἰδεῖν .
He sits apart in the anguish of his grief, silent, dishonored but making no reproach.

159	πόθῳ δ’ ὑπερποντίας φάσμα δόξει δόμων ἀνάσσειν .
In his yearning for her who sped beyond the sea, a phantom will seem to be lord of the house.

160	εὐμόρφων δὲ κολοσσῶν ἔχθεται χάρις ἀνδρί ·
The grace of fair-formed statues is hateful to him;

161	ὀμμάτων δ’ ἐν ἀχηνίαις ἔρρει πᾶσ’ Ἀφροδίτα .
and in the hunger of his eyes all loveliness is departed.

162	ὀνειρόφαντοι δὲ πενθήμονες πάρεισι δόξαι φέρουσαι χάριν ματαίαν .
Mournful apparitions come to him in dreams, bringing only vain joy;

163	μάταν γάρ , εὖτ’ ἂν ἐσθλά τις δοκῶν ὁρᾷ , παραλλάξασα διὰ χερῶν βέβακεν ὄψις οὐ μεθύστερον πτεροῖς ὀπαδοῦσ’ ὕπνου κελεύθοις .
for vainly, whenever in his imagination a man sees delights, straightaway the vision, slipping through his arms, is gone, winging its flight along the paths of sleep.

164	τὰ μὲν κατ’ οἴκους ἐφ’ ἑστίας ἄχη τάδ’ ἐστὶ καὶ τῶνδ’ ὑπερβατώτερα .
Such are the sorrows at hearth and home, but here are sorrows surpassing these;

165	τὸ πᾶν δ’ ἀφ’ Ἕλλανος αἴας συνορμένοις πένθει’ ἀτλησικάρδιος δόμων ἑκάστου πρέπει .
and at large, in every house of all who went forth together from the land of Hellas, unbearable grief is seen.

166	πολλὰ γοῦν θιγγάνει πρὸς ἧπαρ ·
Many things pierce the heart.

167	οὓς μὲν γάρ τις ἔπεμψεν οἶδεν , ἀντὶ δὲ φωτῶν τεύχη καὶ σποδὸς εἰς ἑκάστου δόμους ἀφικνεῖται .
Each knows whom he sent forth. But to the home of each come urns and ashes, not living men.

168	ὁ χρυσαμοιβὸς δ’ Ἄρης σωμάτων καὶ ταλαντοῦχος ἐν μάχῃ δορὸς πυρωθὲν ἐξ Ἰλίου φίλοισι πέμπει βαρὺ ψῆγμα δυσδάκρυτον ἀντήνορος σποδοῦ γεμίζων λέβητας εὐθέτους .
Ares, who trades bodies for gold and holds the scales of battle, sends from Ilium to their loved ones a heavy burden of tear-soaked dust, filling well-made urns with ashes in place of men.

169	στένουσι δ’ εὖ λέγοντες ἄνδρα τὸν μὲν ὡς μάχης ἴδρις , τὸν δ’ ἐν φοναῖς καλῶς πεσόντ’ — ἀλλοτρίας διαὶ γυναικός ·
They mourn, praising one for his prowess in battle, another for falling nobly in the slaughter — all for the sake of another man's wife.

170	τάδε σῖγά τις βαΰζει , φθονερὸν δ’ ὑπ’ ἄλγος ἕρπει προδίκοις Ἀτρείδαις .
Such whispers are muttered in secret, while a resentful grief creeps stealthily against the sons of Atreus, the leaders of the war.

171	οἱ δ’ αὐτοῦ περὶ τεῖχος θήκας Ἰλιάδος γᾶς εὔμορφοι κατέχουσιν ·
But the very men who lie around the walls of Ilium hold possession of their beautiful resting places in Trojan soil;

172	ἐχθρὰ δ’ ἔχοντας ἔκρυψεν .
the land of their enemies has covered its conquerors.

173	βαρεῖα δ’ ἀστῶν φάτις ξὺν κότῳ ·
The people's voice is heavy with wrath;

174	δημοκράντου δ’ ἀρᾶς τίνει χρέος .
and the curse of publicly ratified doom is fulfilled.

175	μένει δ’ ἀκοῦσαί τί μου μέριμνα νυκτηρεφές .
In anxious fear, I wait to hear something shrouded still in gloom.

176	τῶν πολυκτόνων γὰρ οὐκ ἄσκοποι θεοί .
The gods are not blind to men with blood upon their hands.

177	κελαιναὶ δ’ Ἐρινύες χρόνῳ τυχηρὸν ὄντ’ ἄνευ δίκας παλιντυχεῖ τριβᾷ βίου τιθεῖσ’ ἀμαυρόν , ἐν δ’ ἀίστοις τελέθοντος οὔτις ἀλκά ·
The dark Erinyes in time meet out justice to the fortunate who prosper without righteousness, diminishing their path of life, and when a man meets his end, there is no strength left.

178	τὸ δ’ ὑπερκόπως κλύειν ε

ὖ βαρύ ·
It's hard to hear excessive praises without burden;

179	βάλλεται γὰρ ὄσσοις Διόθεν κάρανα .
for the eyes are struck by divine lightning from above.

180	κρίνω δ’ ἄφθονον ὄλβον ·
I choose prosperity unassailed by envy.

181	μήτ’ εἴην πτολιπόρθης μήτ’ οὖν αὐτὸς ἁλοὺς ὑπ’ ἄλλων βίον κατίδοιμι .
May I not be a sacker of cities, nor witness my life spoiled by others.

182	πυρὸς δ’ ὑπ’ εὐαγγέλου πόλιν διήκει θοὰ βάξις ·
A swift report has spread throughout the city, heralded by a beacon of good tidings.

183	εἰ δ’ ἐτήτυμος , τίς οἶδεν , ἤ τι θεῖόν ἐστί πῃ ψύθος .
Yet whether it is true, or some deception of the gods, who knows?

184	— τίς ὧδε παιδνὸς ἢ φρενῶν κεκομμένος, φλογὸς παραγγέλμασιν νέοις πυρωθέντα καρδίαν ἔπειτ’ ἀλλαγᾷ λόγου καμεῖν;
Who is so childish or so bereft of sense, once he has let his heart be fired by sudden news of a beacon fire, to despair if the story changes?

185	— ἐν γυναικὸς αἰχμᾷ πρέπει πρὸ τοῦ φανέντος χάριν ξυναινέσαι.
It is just like a woman’s eager nature to yield assent to pleasing news before yet the truth is clear.

186	— πιθανὸς ἄγαν ὁ θῆλυς ὅρος ἐπινέμεται ταχύπορος.
Too credulous, a woman’s mind has boundaries open to quick encroachment; but quick to perish is rumor spread by a woman.

187	— ἀλλὰ ταχύμορον γυναικογήρυτον ὄλλυται κλέος.
But quick to perish is the fame that is spread by a woman's chatter.

188	—
We shall soon know about this passing on of flaming lights and beacon signals and fires, whether they perhaps are true or whether, dream-like, this light's glad coming has beguiled our senses.

189	τάχ’ εἰσόμεσθα λαμπάδων φαεσφόρων φρυκτωριῶν τε καὶ πυρὸς παραλλαγάς, εἴτ’ οὖν ἀληθεῖς εἶτ’ ὀνειράτων δίκην τερπνὸν τόδ’ ἐλθὸν φῶς ἐφήλωσεν φρένας.
Look! I see approaching from the shore a herald crowned with boughs of olive.

190	κήρυκ’ ἀπ’ ἀκτῆς τόνδ’ ὁρῶ κατάσκιον κλάδοις ἐλαίας.
The thirsty dust, consorting sister of the mud, assures me that neither by pantomime nor by kindling a flame of mountain wood will he signal with smoke of fire.

191	μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι κάσις πηλοῦ ξύνουρος διψία κόνις τάδε, ὡς οὔτ’ ἄναυδος οὔτε σοι δαίων φλόγα ὕλης ὀρείας σημανεῖ καπνῷ πυρός, ἀλλ’ ἢ τὸ χαίρειν μᾶλλον ἐκβάξει λέγων — τὸν ἀντίον δὲ τοῖσδ’ ἀποστέργω λόγον.
Either in plain words he will bid us to rejoice the more, or—but I have little love for the report opposite to this!

192	εὖ γὰρ πρὸς εὖ φανεῖσι προσθήκη πέλοι.
May still further good be added to the good that has appeared!

193	— ὅστις τάδ’ ἄλλως τ

ῇδ’ ἐπεύχεται πόλει, αὐτὸς φρενῶν καρποῖτο τὴν ἁμαρτίαν.
Whoever makes this prayer with other intent toward the state, let him reap himself the fruit of his misguided purpose!

194	ἰὼ πατρῷον οὖδας Ἀργείας χθονός, δεκάτου σε φέγγει τῷδ’ ἀφικόμην ἔτους, πολλῶν ῥαγεισῶν ἐλπίδων μιᾶς τυχών.
All hail, soil of Argos, land of my fathers! On this happy day in the tenth year I have come to you. Many hopes have shattered, one only have I seen fulfilled;

195	οὐ γάρ ποτ’ ηὔχουν τῇδ’ ἐν Ἀργείᾳ χθονὶ θανὼν μεθέξειν φιλτάτου τάφου μέρος.
for I never dared to dream that here in this land of Argos I should die and have due portion of burial most dear to me.

196	νῦν χαῖρε μὲν χθών, χαῖρε δ’ ἡλίου φάος, ὕπατός τε χώρας Ζεύς, ὁ Πύθιός τ’ ἄναξ, τόξοις ἰάπτων μηκέτ’ εἰς ἡμᾶς βέλη;
Now blessings on the land, blessings on the light of the sun, and blessed be Zeus, the land’s Most High, and the Pythian lord; and may he launch no more his shafts against us.

197	ἅλις παρὰ Σκάμανδρον ἦσθ’ ἀνάρσιος;
Enough of your hostility did you display by Scamander’s banks;

198	νῦν δ’ αὖτε σωτὴρ ἴσθι καὶ παιώνιος, ἄναξ Ἄπολλον.
but now, in other mood, be our preserver and our healer, O lord Apollo.

199	τούς τ’ ἀγωνίους θεοὺς πάντας προσαυδῶ, τόν τ’ ἐμὸν τιμάορον Ἑρμῆν, φίλον κήρυκα, κηρύκων σέβας, ἥρως τε τοὺς πέμψαντας, εὐμενεῖς πάλιν στρατὸν δέχεσθαι τὸν λελειμμένον δορός.
And I greet all the gods who presided over the conflict, my own protector Hermes, beloved herald, revered among heralds, and the heroes who sent us forth, may they now kindly receive back the remnant of the army that has escaped the spear.

200	ἰὼ μέλαθρα βασιλέων, φίλαι στέγαι, σεμνοί τε θᾶκοι, δαίμονές τ’ ἀντήλιοι, εἴ που πάλαι, φαιδροῖσι τοισίδ’ ὄμμασι δέξασθε κόσμῳ βασιλέα πολλῷ χρόνῳ.
Hail, halls of our kings, beloved roofs, and you august seats, and you divinities that face the sun, if ever you did in days gone by, now after long lapse of years, with gladness in your eyes receive your king.

201	ἥκει γὰρ ὑμῖν φῶς ἐν εὐφρόνῃ φέρων καὶ τοῖσδ’ ἅπασι κοινὸν Ἀγαμέμνων ἄναξ.
For bearing light in darkness to you and to all assembled here alike, he has returned—Agamemnon, our king.

202	ἀλλ’ εὖ νιν ἀσπάσασθε, καὶ γὰρ οὖν πρέπει Τροίαν κατασκάψαντα τοῦ δικηφόρου Διὸς μακέλλῃ, τῇ κατείργασται πέδον.
Oh greet him well, as is right, since he has uprooted Troy with the mattock of Zeus the Avenger, with which her soil has been uptorn.

203	βωμοὶ δ’ ἄιστοι καὶ θεῶν ἱδρύματα, καὶ σπέρμα πάσης ἐξαπόλλυται χθονός.
Demolished are the altars and the shrines of her gods; and the seed of her whole land has been wasted utterly.

204	τοιόνδε Τροίᾳ περιβαλὼν ζευκτήριον ἄναξ Ἀτρείδης πρέσβυς εὐδαίμων ἀνὴρ ἥκει, τίεσθαι δ’ ἀξιώτατος βροτῶν τῶν νῦν.
Such is the yoke that the lord Atreides, a fortunate elder, has cast around Troy, and he comes back worthy of

the highest honor among men living today.

205	Πάρις γὰρ οὔτε συντελὴς πόλις ἐξεύχεται τὸ δρᾶμα τοῦ πάθους πλέον.
For neither Paris nor the whole city of Troy can claim that their act of outrage outweighs the suffering they have caused.

206	ὀφλὼν γὰρ ἁρπαγῆς τε καὶ κλοπῆς δίκην τοῦ ῥυσίου θ’ ἥμαρτε καὶ πανώλεθρον αὐτόχθονον πατρῷον ἔθρισεν δόμον.
Having paid the penalty for his abduction and theft, he has missed the mark, and his act has led to the utter destruction of his native home and land.

207	διπλᾶ δ’ ἔτεισαν Πριαμίδαι τ- ἁμάρτια.
The sons of Priam have paid a twofold penalty for their sins.

208	κῆρυξ Ἀχαιῶν χαῖρε τῶν ἀπὸ στρατοῦ.
Joy to you, Herald from the Achaean host!

209	χαίρω γε.
I do rejoice.

210	τεθνάναι δ’ οὐκέτ’ ἀντερῶ θεοῖς.
I will no longer refuse to die, if that pleases the gods.

211	ἔρως πατρῴας τῆσδε γῆς σ’ ἐγύμνασεν;
Was it yearning for this your fatherland that wore you out?

212	ὥστ’ ἐνδακρύειν γ’ ὄμμασιν χαρᾶς ὕπο.
Yes, so that my eyes are filled with tears for joy.

213	τερπνῆς ἄρ’ ἦτε τῆσδ’ ἐπήβολοι νόσου.
It was then a pleasing malady from which you suffered.

214	πῶς δή;
How so?

215	διδαχθεὶς τοῦδε δεσπόσω λόγου.
Teach me, and I shall master what you say.

216	τῶν ἀντερώντων ἱμέρῳ πεπληγμένοι.
You were smitten with desire for those who returned your love.

217	ποθεῖν ποθοῦντα τήνδε γῆν στρατὸν λέγεις;
Do you mean that our land longed for the longing host?

218	ὡς πόλλ’ ἀμαυρᾶς ἐκ φρενός μ’ ἀναστένειν πόθεν τὸ δύσφρον τοῦτ’ ἐπῆν θυμῷ στύγος;
Longed so, that often from a darkly brooding spirit I have sighed.

219	πάλαι τὸ σιγᾶν φάρμακον βλάβης ἔχω.
Where did this gloom of melancholy upon your spirit come from?

220	καὶ πῶς;
Long since have I found silence an antidote to harm.

221	ἀπόντων κοιράνων ἔτρεις τινάς;
How so? Did you fear anyone when our princes were gone?

222	ὡς νῦν, τὸ σὸν δή, καὶ θανεῖν πολλὴ χάρις.
In such fear that now, in your own words, even death would be great joy.

223	εὖ γὰρ πέπρακται.
Yes, all’s well, well ended.

224	ταῦτα δ’ ἐν πολλῷ χρόνῳ τὰ μέν τις ἂν λέξειεν εὐπετῶς ἔχειν, τὰ δ’ αὖτε κ- ἐπίμομφα.
Yet, of what occurred in the long years, one might well say that part fell out happily, and part in turn amiss.

225	τίς δὲ πλὴν θεῶν ἅπαντ’ ἀπήμων τὸν δι’ αἰῶνος χρόνον;
But who, unless he is a god, is free from suffering all his days?

226	μόχθους γὰρ εἰ

 λέγοιμι καὶ δυσαυλίας, σπαρνὰς παρήξεις καὶ κακοστρώτους, τί δ’ οὐ στένοντες, οὐ λαχόντες ἤματος μέρος;
For were I to recount our hardships and our wretched quarters, the scanty space and the sorry berths——what did we not have to complain of . . .

227	τὰ δ’ αὖτε χέρσῳ καὶ προσῆν πλέον στύγος;
Then again, ashore, there was still worse to loathe;

228	εὐναὶ γὰρ ἦσαν δηΐων πρὸς τείχεσιν;
for we had to lie down close to the enemy’s walls,

229	ἐξ οὐρανοῦ δὲ κ- ἀπὸ γῆς λειμώνιαι δρόσοι κατεψάκαζον, ἔμπεδον σίνος ἐσθημάτων, τιθέντες ἔνθηρον τρίχα.
and the drizzling from the sky and the dews from the meadows distilled upon us, working constant destruction to our clothes and filling our hair with vermin.

230	χειμῶνα δ’ εἰ λέγοι τις οἰωνοκτόνον, οἷον παρεῖχ’ ἄφερτον Ἰδαία χιών, ἢ θάλπος, εὖτε πόντος ἐν μεσημβριναῖς κοίταις ἀκύμων νηνέμοις εὕδοι πεσών τί ταῦτα πενθεῖν δεῖ;
And if one were to tell of the wintry cold, past all enduring, when Ida’s snow slew the birds; or of the heat, when upon his waveless noonday couch, windless the sea sank to sleep—but why should we bewail all this?

231	παροίχεται πόνος;
Our labor’s past;

232	παροίχεται δέ, τοῖσι μὲν τεθνηκόσιν τὸ μήποτ’ αὖθις μηδ’ ἀναστῆναι μέλειν.
past for the dead so that they will never care even to wake to life again.

233	τί τοὺς ἀναλωθέντας ἐν ψήφῳ λέγειν, τὸν ζῶντα δ’ ἀλγεῖν χρὴ τύχης παλιγκότου;
Why should we count the number of the slain, or why should the living feel pain at their past harsh fortunes?

234	καὶ πολλὰ χαίρειν ξυμφορὰς καταξιῶ.
Our misfortunes should, in my opinion, bid us a long farewell.

235	ἡμῖν δὲ τοῖς λοιποῖσιν Ἀργείων στρατοῦ νικᾷ τὸ κέρδος, πῆμα δ’ οὐκ ἀντιρρέπει.
For us, the remnant of the Argive host, the gain has the advantage, and the loss does not bear down the scale.

236	ὡς κομπάσαι τῷδ’ εἰκὸς ἡλίου φάει ὑπὲρ θαλάσσης καὶ χθονὸς ποτωμένοις.
So that, as we speed over land and sea, it is fitting that we on this bright day make this boast.

237	Τροίαν ἑλόντες δή ποτ’ Ἀργείων στόλος θεοῖς λάφυρα ταῦτα τοῖς καθ’ Ἑλλάδα δόμοις ἐπασσάλευσαν ἀρχαῖον γάνος.
The Argive army, having taken Troy at last, has nailed up these spoils to be a glory for the gods throughout Hellas in their shrines from days of old.

238	τοιαῦτα χρὴ κλύοντας εὐλογεῖν πόλιν καὶ τοὺς στρατηγούς.
Whoever hears the story of these deeds must extol the city and the leaders of her host.

239	καὶ χάρις τιμήσεται Διὸς τόδ’ ἐκπράξασα.
And the grace of Zeus that brought them to accomplishment shall receive its due measure of gratitude.

240	νικώμενος λόγοισιν οὐκ ἀναίνομαι;
I do not refuse to be conquered by words;

241	ἀεὶ γὰρ ἥβη τοῖς γέρουσιν εὖ μαθεῖν.
for it is always good for the old to learn well.

242	δόμοις δὲ ταῦτα καὶ Κλυταιμήστρᾳ μέλειν εἰκὸς μάλιστα, σὺν δὲ πλουτίζειν ἐμέ.
But these matters should concern the household and Clytaemestra most, and also enrich me.

243	ἀνωλόλυξα μὲν πάλαι χαρᾶς ὕπο, ὅτ’ ἦλθ’ ὁ πρῶτος νύχιος ἄγγελος πυρός, φράζων ἅλωσιν Ἰλίου τ’ ἀνάστασιν.
I have long since shouted for joy, when the first night-time messenger of fire came, announcing the fall of Ilium and its destruction.

244	καί τίς μ’ ἐνίπτων εἶπε, φρυκτωρῶν δία πεισθεῖσα Τροίαν νῦν πεπορθῆσθαι δοκεῖς?
And who rebuked me, saying, "Persuaded by beacon-fires, do you think that Troy is now sacked?"

245	ἦ κάρτα πρὸς γυναικὸς αἴρεσθαι κέαρ.
Indeed, it is very characteristic of a woman to be uplifted in heart.

246	λόγοις τοιούτοις πλαγκτὸς οὖσ’ ἐφαινόμην.
With such words, I seemed to be wandering in my wits.

247	ὅμως δ’ ἔθυον, καὶ γυναικείῳ νόμῳ ὀλολυγμὸν ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν κατὰ πτόλιν ἔλασκον εὐφημοῦντες ἐν θεῶν ἕδραις θυηφάγον κοιμῶντες εὐώδη φλόγα.
Nevertheless, I sacrificed, and in womanly fashion, the cry of joy was driven from place to place throughout the city, with the people in the gods' temples lulling to rest the spice-fed, fragrant flame.

248	καὶ νῦν τὰ μάσσω μὲν τί δεῖ σέ μοι λέγειν;
And now, why should I rehearse these things for you to tell me?

249	ἄνακτος αὐτοῦ πάντα πεύσομαι λόγον.
From the lord himself, I shall learn the whole story.

250	ὅπως δ’ ἄριστα τὸν ἐμὸν αἰδοῖον πόσιν σπεύσω πάλιν μολόντα δέξασθαι;
But how best to hasten to welcome my revered husband on his return?

251	— τί γὰρ γυναικὶ τούτου φέγγος ἥδιον δρ

ακεῖν, ἀπὸ στρατείας ἀνδρὶ σώσαντος θεοῦ πύλας ἀνοῖξαι;
For what light is more pleasant for a woman to see than to open the gates for her husband, saved by a god from war?

252	— ταῦτ’ ἀπάγγειλον πόσει;
Give this message to my husband;

253	ἥκειν ὅπως τάχιστ’ ἐράσμιον πόλει;
let him come as quickly as possible, dearly desired by the city;

254	γυναῖκα πιστὴν δ’ ἐν δόμοις εὕροι μολὼν οἵαν περ οὖν ἔλειπε, δωμάτων κύνα ἐσθλὴν ἐκείνῳ, πολεμίαν τοῖς δύσφροσιν, καὶ τ- ἄλλ’ ὁμοίαν πάντα, σημαντήριον οὐδὲν διαφθείρασαν ἐν μήκει χρόνου.
may he find at home a faithful wife just as he left her, a good watchdog for his house, an enemy to his foes, and in all respects unaltered, having corrupted no sign in the length of time.

255	οὐδ’ οἶδα τέρψιν οὐδ’ ἐπίψογον φάτιν ἄλλου πρὸς ἀνδρὸς μᾶλλον ἢ χαλκοῦ βαφάς.
Nor do I know the delight or reproach of another man more than I do of dying bronze.

256	τοιόσδ’ ὁ κόμπος τῆς ἀληθείας γέμων οὐκ αἰσχρὸς ὡς γυναικὶ γενναίᾳ λακεῖν.
Such a boast, full of truth, is not shameful for a noble woman to utter.

257	αὕτη μὲν οὕτως εἶπε μανθάνοντί σοι τοροῖσιν ἑρμηνεῦσιν εὐπρεπῶς λόγον.
She thus spoke for your learning, rightly interpreting her words.

258	σὺ δ’ εἰπέ, κῆρυξ, Μενέλεων δὲ πεύθομαι.
But tell me, herald, about Menelaus.

259	εἰ νόστιμός τε καὶ σεσωσμένος πάλιν ἥκει σὺν ὑμῖν, τῆσδε γῆς φίλον κράτος.
Has he, our land’s dear lord, traveled safely home and returned with you?

260	οὐκ ἔσθ’ ὅπως λέξαιμι τὰ ψευδῆ καλὰ ἐς τὸν πολὺν φίλοισι καρποῦσθαι χρόνον.
It is not right for me to tell beautiful lies that friends might enjoy for a long time.

261	πῶς δῆτ’ ἂν εἰπὼν κεδνὰ τ- ἀληθῆ τύχοις;
How then could you be fortunate in telling things both noble and true?

262	σχισθέντα δ’ οὐκ εὔκρυπτα γίγνεται τάδε.
These matters are not easily concealed when truth and goodness are parted.

263	ἁνὴρ ἄφαντος ἐξ Ἀχαιικοῦ στρατοῦ, αὐτός τε καὶ τὸ πλοῖον.
The man is unseen from the Achaean army, both he and his ship.

264	οὐ ψευδῆ λέγω.
I do not speak falsely.

265	πότερον ἀναχθεὶς ἐμφανῶς ἐξ Ἰλίου, ἢ χεῖμα, κοινὸν ἄχθος, ἥρπασε στρατοῦ;
Was he clearly seen setting sail from Ilium, or did a storm, a common burden, snatch him from the army?

266	ἔκυρσας ὥστε τοξότης ἄκρος σκοποῦ.
You have aimed well, like a bowman at the top of his watchtower.

267	μακρὸν δὲ πῆμα συντόμως ἐφημίσω.
I shall quickly proclaim a long tale of woe.

268	πότερα γὰρ αὐτοῦ ζῶντος ἢ τεθνηκότος φάτις πρὸς ἄλλων ναυτίλων ἐκλῄζετο;
Was news of him, whether alive or dead, spread among the other sailors?

269	οὐκ οἶδεν οὐδεὶς ὥστ’ ἀπαγγεῖλαι τορῶς, πλὴν τοῦ τρέφοντος Ἡλίου χθονὸς φύσιν.
No one knows so as to report reliably, except for the Sun that nurtures the earth's nature.

270	πῶς γὰρ λέγεις χειμῶνα ναυτικῷ στρατῷ ἐλθεῖν τελευτῆσαί τε δαιμόνων κότῳ;
How do you say a storm came upon the naval host and ended by the wrath of the gods?

271	εὔφημον ἦμαρ οὐ πρέπει κακαγγέλῳ γλώσσῃ μιαίνειν;
It is not fitting to defile an auspicious day with a tongue that brings bad news.

272	χωρὶς ἡ τιμὴ θεῶν.
Apart from the honor due to the gods.

273	ὅταν δ’ ἀπευκτὰ πήματ’ ἄγγελος πόλει στυγνῷ προσώπῳ πτωσίμου στρατοῦ φέρῃ, πόλει μὲν ἕλκος ἓν τὸ δήμιον τυχεῖν, πολλοὺς δὲ πολλῶν ἐξαγισθέντας δόμων ἄνδρας διπλῇ μάστιγι, τὴν Ἄρης φιλεῖ, δίλογχον ἄτην, φοινίαν ξυνωρίδα;
When a messenger brings to a city the dire news of its army's downfall with a grim face, it is like a single wound inflicted on the state, while many men from many homes are sacrificed to the double scourge beloved of Ares, a two-pronged misery, a bloody pair.

274	τοιῶνδε μέντοι πημάτων σεσαγμένον πρέπει λέγειν παιᾶνα τόνδ’ Ἐρινύων.
For such woes, it is fitting to speak a triumph-song of these Furies.

275	σωτηρίων δὲ πραγμάτων εὐάγγελον ἥκοντα πρὸς χαίρουσαν εὐεστοῖ πόλιν, πῶς κεδνὰ τοῖς κακοῖσι συμμείξω, λέγων χειμῶν’ Ἀχαιοῖς οὐκ

ἀμήνιτον θεῶν;
How can I, bringing glad news of deliverance to a city rejoicing in its happiness, mix good with evil by speaking of a storm that struck the Achaeans, not without the gods' wrath?

276	ξυνώμοσαν γάρ, ὄντες ἔχθιστοι τὸ πρίν, πῦρ καὶ θάλασσα, καὶ τὰ πίστ’ ἐδειξάτην φθείροντε τὸν δύστηνον Ἀργείων στρατόν.
For fire and sea, previously the bitterest of foes, swore an alliance, and as proof destroyed the unfortunate Argive army.

277	ἐν νυκτὶ δυσκύμαντα δ’ ὠρώρει κακά.
In the night, misfortunes rose from the cruel waves.

278	ναῦς γὰρ πρὸς ἀλλήλαισι Θρῄκιαι πνοαὶ ἤρεικον.
For Thrakian gusts hurled ship against ship.

279	αἱ δὲ κεροτυπούμεναι βίᾳ χειμῶνι τυφῶ σὺν ζάλῃ τ’ ὀμβροκτύπῳ ᾤχοντ’ ἄφαντοι ποιμένος κακοῦ στρόβῳ.
And they, battered violently by the storm, the whirlwind, and the clashing rain, were swept away unseen by the whirl of an evil shepherd.

280	ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀνῆλθε λαμπρὸν ἡλίου φάος, ὁρῶμεν ἀνθοῦν πέλαγος Αἰγαῖον νεκροῖς ἀνδρῶν Ἀχαιῶν ναυτικοῖς τ’ ἐρειπίοις.
But when the radiant light of the sun rose, we saw the Aegean sea flowering with the corpses of Achaean men and the wreckage of their ships.

281	ἡμᾶς γε μὲν δὴ ναῦν τ’ ἀκήρατον σκάφος ἤτοι τις ἐξέκλεψεν ἢ ’ξῃτήσατο θεός τις, οὐκ ἄνθρωπος, οἴακος θιγών.
As for us, either some god secretly took out or chose our ship, its hull unharmed, not a man, touching its rudder.

282	τύχη δὲ σωτὴρ ναῦν θέλουσ’ ἐφέζετο, ὡς μήτ’ ἐν ὅρμῳ κύματος ζάλην ἔχειν μήτ’ ἐξοκεῖλαι πρὸς κραταίλεων χθόνα.
And Savior Fortune sat aboard our vessel, willing that it should neither take in the surf at anchorage nor be driven onto the rocky land.

283	ἔπειτα δ’ Ἅιδην πό

ντιον πεφευγότες, λευκὸν κατ’ ἦμαρ, οὐ πεποιθότες τύχῃ, ἐβουκολοῦμεν φροντίσιν νέον πάθος, στρατοῦ καμόντος καὶ κακῶς σποδουμένου.
Then, having escaped the sea as Hades, in the clear light of day, not trusting our luck, we were beset by new distress, thinking of our army worn and ill-fated.

284	καὶ νῦν ἐκείνων εἴ τίς ἐστιν ἐμπνέων, λέγουσιν ἡμᾶς ὡς ὀλωλότας, τί μή;
So now, if any of them still lives, they say of us that we perished. Why not?

285	ἡμεῖς τ’ ἐκείνους τ- ταὔτʼ ἔχειν δοξάζομεν.
And we, in turn, think the same of them.

286	γένοιτο δ’ ὡς ἄριστα.
But may all turn out for the best.

287	Μενέλεων γὰρ οὖν πρῶτόν τε καὶ μάλιστα προσδόκα μολεῖν.
For we first and foremost expect Menelaus to return.

288	εἰ γοῦν τις ἀκτὶς ἡλίου νιν ἱστορεῖ καὶ ζῶντα καὶ βλέποντα, μηχαναῖς Διός, οὔπω θέλοντος ἐξαναλῶσαι γένος, ἐλπίς τις αὐτὸν πρὸς δόμους ἥξειν πάλιν.
If indeed any ray of the sun sees him alive and seeing, by the machinations of Zeus, who is not yet willing to annihilate the race, there is hope that he will come home again.

289	τοσαῦτ’ ἀκούσας ἴσθι τ- ἀληθῆ κλύων.
Having heard so much, know that you hear the truth.

290	τίς ποτ’ ὠνόμαζεν ὧδ’ ἐς τὸ πᾶν ἐτητύμως — μή τις ὅντιν’ οὐχ ὁρῶμεν προνοίαισι τοῦ πεπρωμένου γλῶσσαν ἐν τύχῃ νέμων;
Who could have named her so very aptly — unless some invisible power, guiding the tongue by the fates, named her?

291	— τὰν δορίγαμβρον ἀμφινεικῆ θ’ Ἑλέναν;
The spear-bride and the cause of strife, Helen?

292	ἐπεὶ πρεπόντως ἑλένας, ἕλανδρος, ἑλέπτολις, ἐκ τῶν ἁβροτίμων προκαλυμμάτων ἔπλευσε ζεφύρου γίγαντος

 αὔρᾳ, πολύανδροί τε φεράσπιδες κυναγοὶ κατ’ ἴχνος πλατᾶν ἄφαντον κελσάντων Σιμόεντος ἀκτὰς ἐπ’ ἀεξιφύλλους δι’ ἔριν αἱματόεσσαν.
For fittingly she brought destruction to ships, to men, and to the city, sailing away from her luxurious chamber on the breath of the giant Zephyrus, pursued by shield-bearing huntsmen, following the trail over the seas to the leafy banks of Simoeis, for a strife drenched in blood.

293	Ἰλίῳ δὲ κῆδος ὀρθώνυμον τελεσσίφρων μῆνις ἤλασεν, τραπέζας ἀτίμωσιν ὑστέρῳ χρόνῳ καὶ ξυνεστίου Διὸς πρασσομένα τὸ νυμφότιμον μέλος ἐκφάτως τίοντας, ὑμέναιον, ὃς τότ’ ἐπέρρεπεν γαμβροῖσιν ἀείδειν.
To Ilium, then, Wrath brought a marriage, its name suiting its nature, exacting in due time a reckoning for the dishonor of the feast and for Zeus, the guest-friend, for the wedding feast that was celebrated, a song which then was inclined to be sung by the bridegrooms.

294	μεταμανθάνουσα δ’ ὕμνον Πριάμου πόλις γεραιὰ πολύθρηνον μέγα που στένει κικλήσκουσα Πάριν τὸν αἰνόλεκτρον, παμπορθῆ πολύθρηνον αἰῶνα διαὶ πολιτᾶν μέλεον αἷμ’ ἀνατλᾶσα.
Priam's aged city, having learned the song of sorrow, now laments deeply, calling Paris the evil-bedded, who brought utter ruin, a life full of sorrow, drawing upon the citizens much blood.

295	ἔθρεψεν δὲ λέοντος ἶνιν δόμοις ἀγάλακτον οὕτως ἀνὴρ φιλόμαστον, ἐν βιότου προτελείοις ἅμερον, εὐφιλόπαιδα καὶ γεραροῖς ἐπίχαρτον.
Such was the man who reared in his house a lion's cub, deprived of milk, yet fond of the breast, at first gentle in the preludes of life, well-disposed to children and a delight to the old.

296	πολέα δ’ ἔσχ’ ἐν ἀγκάλαις νεοτρόφου τέκνου δίκαν, φαιδρωπὸς ποτὶ χεῖρα σαίνων τε γαστρὸς ἀνάγκαις.
It had much in its arms like a newly-nurtured child, brightly looking at the hand and fawning for the needs of the belly.

297	χρονισθεὶς δ’ ἀπέδειξεν ἦθος τὸ πρὸς τοκέων;
After time passed, he revealed his nature towards his parents;

298	χάριν γὰρ τροφεῦσιν ἀμείβων μηλοφόνοισιν ἐν ἄταις δαῖτ’ ἀκέλευστος ἔτευξεν;
For as a return to those who reared him, he prepared a feast unbidden, causing death and destruction among the flocks;

299	αἵματι δ’ οἶκος ἐφύρθη, ἄμαχον ἄλγος οἰκέταις μέγα σίνος πολυκτόνον.
And the house was fouled with blood, a great, helpless grief for the household, a great harm causing much death.

300	ἐκ θεοῦ δ’ ἱερεύς τις ἄτας δόμοις προσεθρέφθη.
A priest of ruin, by order of a god, it was reared in the house.

301	πάραυτα δ’ ἐλθεῖν ἐς Ἰλίου πόλιν λέγοιμ’ ἂν φρόνημα μὲν νηνέμου γαλάνας, ἀκασκαῖον δ’ ἄγαλμα πλούτου, μαλθακὸν ὀμμάτων βέλος, δηξίθυμον ἔρωτος ἄνθος.
I would say that to Ilium came a spirit as of calm seas, a baleful treasure of wealth, a soft dart from her eyes, a passionate flower of love.

302	παρακλίνασ’ ἐπέκρανεν δὲ γάμου πικρὰς τελευτάς, δύσεδρος καὶ δυσόμιλος συμένα Πριαμίδαισιν, πομπᾷ Διὸς ξενίου, νυμφόκλαυτος Ἐρινύς.
Turning aside, she brought her marriage to bitter ends, hard to live with and hard to talk to, joining the Priamidae, a Fury wept for by brides, an escort of Zeus the host.

303	παλαίφατος δ’ ἐν βροτοῖς γέρων λόγος τέτυκται, μέγαν τελεσθέντα φωτὸς ὄλβον τεκνοῦσθαι μηδ’ ἄπαιδα θνῄσκειν, ἐκ δ’ ἀγαθᾶς τύχας γένει βλαστάνειν ἀκόρεστον οἰζύν.
An ancient saying among mortals has been made, that when a man's greatness is accomplished, it brings forth, not childless, but from his good fortune there springs an insatiable sorrow.

304	δίχα δ’ ἄλλων μονόφρων εἰμί.
I stand alone in my opinion apart from others.

305	τὸ δυσσεβὲς γὰρ ἔργον μετὰ μὲν πλείονα τίκτει, σφετέρᾳ δ’ εἰκότα γέννᾳ.
For the impious deed afterwards begets more, like its own kind.

306	οἴκων δ’ ἄρ’ εὐθυδίκων καλλίπαις πότμος αἰεί.
But the fate of well-ordered homes is ever to be well-childrened.

307	φιλεῖ δὲ τίκτειν Ὕβρις μὲν παλαιὰ νεάζουσαν ἐν κακοῖς βροτῶν ὕβριν τότ’ ἢ τόθ’, ὅτε τὸ κύριον μόλῃ φάος τόκου, δαίμονά τε τὰν ἄμαχον ἀπόλεμον, ἀνίερον Θράσος, μελαίνας μελάθροισιν Ἄτας, εἰδομένας τοκεῦσιν.
But old Hubris loves to breed young Hubris, at the hour when the fated birth of doom comes on, the daemon unvanquished in war,

 unholy Boldness, black Ruin in the house, like their parents.

308	Δίκα δὲ λάμπει μὲν ἐν δυσκάπνοις δώμασιν, τὸν δ’ ἐναίσιμον τίει βίον.
But Justice shines in smoky homes and honors the life of the just.

309	τὰ χρυσόπαστα δ’ ἔδεθλα σὺν πίνῳ χερῶν παλιντρόποις ὄμμασι λιποῦσ’, ὅσια προσέμολε, δύναμιν οὐ σέβουσα πλούτου παράσημον αἴνῳ.
She leaves behind the prizes of wealth, gilded with the deceit of hands, turning away her eyes, and approaches those who are righteous, not respecting the power of wealth falsely praised.

310	πᾶν δ’ ἐπὶ τέρμα νωμᾷ.
All things she guides to their proper end.

311	ἄγε δή, βασιλεῦ, Τροίας πτολίπορθ’, Ἀτρέως γένεθλον, πῶς σε προσείπω;
Come then, O king, sacker of Troy, offspring of Atreus, how shall I address you?

312	πῶς σε σεβίζω μήθ’ ὑπεράρας μήθ’ ὑποκάμψας καιρὸν χάριτος?
How shall I honor you, neither overstepping nor falling short of the due measure of respect?

313	πολλοὶ δὲ βροτῶν τὸ δοκεῖν εἶναι προτίουσι δίκην παραβάντες.
Many mortals prefer seeming over being, transgressing righteousness.

314	τῷ δυσπραγοῦντι δ’ ἐπιστενάχειν πᾶς τις ἕτοιμος;
Everyone is ready to sigh over the unfortunate;

315	δῆγμα δὲ λύπης οὐδὲν ἐφ’ ἧπαρ προσικνεῖται.
but no trace of sorrow touches the heart.

316	καὶ ξυγχαίρουσιν ὁμοιοπρεπεῖς ἀγέλαστα πρόσωπα βιαζόμενοι.
And they force their faces into smiles, sharing in a show of joy.

317	ὅστις δ’ ἀγαθὸς προβατογνώμων, οὐκ ἔστι λαθεῖν ὄμματα φωτός, τὰ δοκοῦντ’ εὔφρονος ἐκ διανοίας ὑδαρεῖ σαίνειν φιλότητι.
But whoever is a good shepherd of his flock cannot be deceived by men's eyes which, while they feign loyalty of heart, only fawn upon him with watery affection.

318	σὺ δέ μοι τότε μὲν στέλλων στρατιὰν Ἑλένης ἕνεκ’, οὐ γάρ σ’ ἐπικεύσω, κάρτ’ ἀπομούσως ἦσθα γεγραμμένος, οὐδ’ εὖ πραπίδων οἴακα νέμων θράσος ἐκ θυσιῶν ἀνδράσι θνῄσκουσι κομίζων.
Now in the past, when you marshaled the army in Helen's cause, you were depicted in my eyes (for I will not hide it from you) most ungracefully and as not rightly guiding the helm of your mind in seeking through your sacrifices to bring courage to dying men.

319	νῦν δ’ οὐκ ἀπ’ ἄκρας φρενὸς οὐδ’ ἀφίλως εὔφρων πόνος εὖ τελέσασιν.
But now, from the depth of my heart and with no lack of love, their toil is joy to those who have won success.

320	γνώσῃ δὲ χρόνῳ διαπευθόμενος τόν τε δικαίως καὶ τὸν ἀκαίρως πόλιν οἰκουροῦντα πολιτῶν.
In course of time you shall learn by enquiry who of your people has been an honest, and who an unfitting guardian of the State.

321	πρῶτον μὲν Ἄργος καὶ θεοὺς ἐγχωρίους δίκη προσειπεῖν, τοὺς ἐμοὶ μεταιτίους νόστου δικαίων θ’ ὧν ἐπραξάμην πόλιν Πριάμου.
Argos first, as is right and proper, I greet, and her local gods who have helped me to my safe return and to the justice I exacted from Priam’s town.

322	δίκας γὰρ οὐκ ἀπὸ γλώσσης θεοὶ κλύοντες ἀνδροθνῆτας Ἰλίου φθορὰς ἐς αἱματηρὸν τεῦχος οὐ διχορρόπως ψήφους ἔθεντο.
For listening to no pleadings by word of mouth, without dissenting voice, they cast into the bloody urn their ballots for the murderous destroying of Ilium.

323	τῷ δ’ ἐναντίῳ κύτει ἐλπὶς προσῄει χειρὸς οὐ πληρουμένῳ.
But to the urn of acquittal that no hand filled, Hope alone drew near.

324	καπνῷ δ’ ἁλοῦσα νῦν ἔτ’ εὔσημος πόλις.
The smoke even now still declares the city’s fall.

325	ἄτης θύελλαι ζῶσι.
Destruction’s blasts still live,

326	συνθνῄσκουσα δὲ σποδὸς προπέμπει πίονας πλούτου πνοάς.
and the embers, as they die, breathe forth rich fumes of wealth.

327	τούτων θεοῖσι χρὴ πολύμνηστον χάριν τίνειν, ἐπείπερ καὶ πάγας ὑπερκότους ἐφραξάμεσθα καὶ γυναικὸς οὕνεκα πόλιν διημάθυνεν Ἀργεῖον δάκος, ἵππου νεοσσός, ἀσπιδηφόρος λεώς, πήδημ’ ὀρούσας ἀμφὶ Πλειάδων δύσιν.
For this success we should render to the gods a return in ever-mindful gratitude, seeing that we have thrown round the city the toils of vengeance, and in a woman’s cause it has been laid low

by the fierce Argive beast, brood of the horse, a shield-armed folk, that launched its leap when the Pleiades waned.

328	ὑπερθορὼν δὲ πύργον ὠμηστὴς λέων ἄδην ἔλειξεν αἵματος τυραννικοῦ.
Vaulting over its towered walls, the ravening lion lapped up his fill of princely blood.

329	θεοῖς μὲν ἐξέτεινα φροίμιον τόδε.
For the gods then I have stretched out this prelude.

330	τὰ δ’ ἐς τὸ σὸν φρόνημα, μέμνημαι κλύων, καὶ φημὶ τ- αὐτὰ καὶ συνήγορόν μ’ ἔχεις.
But, touching your sentiments—which I heard and still bear in memory—I both agree and you have in me an advocate.

331	παύροις γὰρ ἀνδρῶν ἐστι συγγενὲς τόδε, φίλον τὸν εὐτυχοῦντ’ ἄνευ φθόνου σέβειν.
For few there are among men in whom it is inborn to admire without envy a friend’s good fortune.

332	δύσφρων γὰρ ἰὸς καρδίαν προσήμενος ἄχθος διπλοίζει τῷ πεπαμένῳ νόσον, τοῖς τ’ αὐτὸς αὑτοῦ πήμασιν βαρύνεται καὶ τὸν θυραῖον ὄλβον εἰσορῶν στένει.
For the venom of malevolence settles upon the heart and doubles the burden of him who suffers from that plague: he is himself weighed down by his own calamity, and groans to see another’s prosperity.

333	εἰδὼς λέγοιμ’ ἄν, εὖ γὰρ ἐξεπίσταμαι ὁμιλίας κάτοπτρον, εἴδωλον σκιᾶς δοκοῦντας εἶναι κάρτα πρευμενεῖς ἐμοί.
From knowledge—for well I know the mirror of companionship—I may call a shadow of a shade those who feigned exceeding loyalty to me.

334	μόνος δ’ Ὀδυσσεύς, ὅσπερ οὐχ ἑκὼν ἔπλει, ζευχθεὶς ἕτοιμος ἦν ἐμοὶ σειραφόρος.
Only Odysseus, the very man who sailed against his will, once harnessed, proved my zealous yoke-fellow.

335	εἴτ’ οὖν θανόντος εἴτε καὶ ζῶντος πέρι λέγω.
This I affirm of him whether he is alive or dead.

336	τὰ δ’ ἄλλα πρὸς πόλιν τε καὶ θεοὺς κοινοὺς ἀγῶνας θέντες ἐν πανηγύρει βουλευσόμεσθα.
But, for the rest, in what concerns the State and public worship, we shall appoint open debates and consider.

337	καὶ τὸ μὲν καλῶς ἔχον ὅπως χρονίζον εὖ μενεῖ βουλευτέον.
Where all goes well, we must take counsel so that it may long endure;

338	ὅτῳ δὲ καὶ δεῖ φαρμάκων παιωνίων, ἤτοι κέαντες ἢ τεμόντες εὐφρόνως πειρασόμεσθα πῆμ’ ἀποστρέψαι νόσου.
but whenever there is need of healing remedy, we will by kind appliance of cautery or the knife endeavor to avert the mischief of the disease.

339	νῦν δ’ ἐς μέλαθρα καὶ δόμους ἐφεστίους ἐλθὼν θεοῖσι πρῶτα δεξιώσομαι, οἵπερ πρόσω πέμψαντες ἤγαγον πάλιν.
And now I will pass to my palace halls and to my household hearth, and first of all pay greeting to the gods. They who sent me forth have brought me home again.

340	νίκη δ’ ἐπείπερ ἕσπετ’, ἐμπέδως μένοι.
May victory, now that it has attended me, remain ever with me constant to the end! He descends from his chariot; enter Clytaemestra, attended by maidservants carrying purple tapestries

341	ἄνδρες πολῖται, πρέσβος Ἀργείων τόδε, οὐκ αἰσχυνοῦμαι τοὺς φιλάνορας τρόπους λέξαι πρὸς ὑμᾶς.
Citizens of Argos, you Elders present here, I shall not be ashamed to confess in your presence my fondness for my husband—with time diffidence dies away in humans.

342	ἐν χρόνῳ δ’ ἀποφθίνει τὸ τάρβος ἀνθρώποισιν.
Untaught by others, I can tell of my own weary life all the long while my husband was beneath Ilium’s walls.

343	οὐκ ἄλλων πάρα μαθοῦσ’, ἐμαυτῆς δύσφορον λέξω βίον τοσόνδ’ ὅσον περ οὗτος ἦν ὑπ’ Ἰλίῳ.
First and foremost, it is a terrible evil for a wife to sit forlorn at home, severed from her husband, always hearing many malignant rumors.

344	τὸ μὲν γυναῖκα πρῶτον ἄρσενος δίχα ἧσθαι δόμοις ἔρημον ἔκπαγλον κακόν, πο

344	τὸ μὲν γυναῖκα πρῶτον ἄρσενος δίχα ἧσθαι δόμοις ἔρημον ἔκπαγλον κακόν, πολλὰς κλύουσαν κληδόνας παλιγκότους.
and for one to sit deserted at home without her man is a terrible evil for a wife, hearing many malignant rumors,

345	καὶ τὸν μὲν ἥκειν, τὸν δ’ ἐπεσφέρειν κακοῦ κάκιον ἄλλο πῆμα, λάσκοντας δόμοις.
and for one messenger after another to come bearing tidings of disaster, each worse than the last, and cry them to the household.

346	καὶ τραυμάτων μὲν εἰ τόσων ἐτύγχανεν ἀνὴρ ὅδ’, ὡς πρὸς οἶκον ὠχετεύετο φάτις, τέτρηται δικτύου πλέον λέγειν.
And as for wounds, had my husband received so many as rumor kept pouring into the house, no net would have been pierced so full of holes as he.

347	εἰ δ’ ἦν τεθνηκώς, ὡς ἐπλήθυον λόγοι, τρισώματός τ- ἂν Γηρυὼν ὁ δεύτερος πολλὴν ἄνωθεν, τὴν κάτω γὰρ οὐ λέγω, χθονὸς τρίμοιρον χλαῖναν ἐξηύχει λαβεῖν, ἅπαξ ἑκάστῳ κατθανὼν μορφώματι.
Or if he had died as often as reports claimed, then truly he might have had three bodies, a second Geryon, and have boasted of having taken on him a triple cloak of earth ample that above, of that below I speak not, one death for each different shape.

348	τοιῶνδ’ ἕκατι κληδόνων παλιγκότων πολλὰς ἄνωθεν ἀρτάνας ἐμῆς δέρης ἔλυσαν ἄλλοι πρὸς βίαν λελημμένης.
Because of such malignant tales as these, many times others have had to loose the high-hung halter from my neck, held in its strong grip.

349	ἐκ τῶνδέ τοι παῖς ἐνθάδ’ οὐ παραστατεῖ, ἐμῶν τε καὶ σῶν κύριος πιστωμάτων, ὡς χρῆν, Ὀρέστης.
It is for this reason, in fact, that our boy, Orestes, does not stand here beside me, as he should—he in whom rest the pledges of my love and yours.

350	μηδὲ θαυμάσῃς τόδε.
Nor should you think this strange.

351	τρέφει γὰρ αὐτὸν εὐμενὴς δορύξενος Στρόφιος ὁ Φωκεύς , ἀμφίλεκτα πήματα ἐμοὶ προφωνῶν , τόν θ’ ὑπ’ Ἰλίῳ σέθεν κίνδυνον , εἴ τε δημόθρους ἀναρχία βουλὴν καταρρίψειεν , ὥστε σύγγονον βροτοῖσι τὸν πεσόντα λακτίσαι πλέον .
For he is in the protecting care of our well-intentioned ally, Strophius of Phocis, who warned me of trouble on two scores—your own peril beneath Ilium’s walls, and then the chance that the people in clamorous revolt might overturn the Council, as it is natural for men to trample all the more upon the fallen. Truly such an excuse supports no guile.

352	τοιάδε μέντοι σκῆψις οὐ δόλον φέρει .
Truly such an excuse supports no guile.

353	ἔμοιγε μὲν δὴ κλαυμάτων ἐπίσσυτοι πηγαὶ κατεσβήκασιν , οὐδ’ ἔνι σταγών .
As for myself, the welling fountains of my tears are utterly dried up—not a drop remains.

354	ἐν ὀψικοίτοις δ’ ὄμμασιν βλάβας ἔχω τὰς ἀμφί σοι κλαίουσα λαμπτηρουχίας ἀτημελήτους αἰέν .
In night-long vigils my eyes are sore with weeping for the beacon-lights set for you but always neglected.

355	ἐν δ’ ὀνείρασιν λεπταῖς ὑπαὶ κώνωπος ἐξηγειρόμην ῥιπαῖσι θωύσσοντος , ἀμφί σοι πάθη ὁρῶσα πλείω τοῦ ξυνεύδοντος χρόνου .
The faint whir of the buzzing gnat often waked me from dreams in which I beheld more disasters to you than the time of sleep could have compassed.

356	νῦν ταῦτα πάντα τλᾶσ’ ἀπενθήτῳ φρενὶ λέγοιμ’ ἂν ἄνδρα τόνδε τῶν σταθμῶν κύνα , σωτῆρα ναὸς πρότονον , ὑψηλῆς στέγης στῦλον ποδήρη , μονογενὲς τέκνον πατρί , καὶ γῆν φανεῖσαν ναυτίλοις παρ’ ἐλπίδα , κάλλιστον ἦμαρ εἰσιδεῖν ἐκ χείματος , ὁδοιπόρῳ διψῶντι πηγαῖ

ον ῥέος ·
But now, having born all this, my heart freed from its anxiety, I would hail my husband here as the watchdog of the fold, the savior forestay of the ship, firm-based pillar of the lofty roof, only-begotten son of a father, or land glimpsed by men at sea beyond their hope, dawn most fair to look upon after storm, the gushing stream to thirsty wayfarer—sweet is it to escape all stress of need.

357	τερπνὸν δὲ τ- ἀναγκαῖον ἐκφυγεῖν ἅπαν .
Such truly are the greetings of which I deem him worthy. 

358	τοιοῖσδέ τοί νιν ἀξιῶ προσφθέγμασιν .
But let envy be far removed, since many were the ills we endured before.

359	φθόνος δ’ ἀπέστω ·
But let envy be far removed, since many were the ills we endured before.

360	πολλὰ γὰρ τὰ πρὶν κακὰ ἠνειχόμεσθα .
But now, I pray you, my dear lord, dismount from your car, but do not set on common earth the foot, my King, that has trampled upon Ilium.

361	νῦν δέ μοι , φίλον κάρα , ἔκβαιν’ ἀπήνης τῆσδε , μὴ χαμαὶ τιθεὶς τὸν σὸν πόδ’ , ὦναξ , Ἰλίου πορθήτορα .
And now, I pray you, my dear lord, dismount from your car, but do not set on common earth the foot, my King, that has trampled upon Ilium.

362	δμῳαί , τί μέλλεθ’ , αἷς ἐπέσταλται τέλος πέδον κελεύθου στρωννύναι πετάσμασιν ;
To her attendants: Why this loitering, women, to whom I have assigned the task to strew with tapestries the place where he shall go?

363	εὐθὺς γενέσθω πορφυρόστρωτος πόρος ἐς δῶμ’ ἄελπτον ὡς ἂν ἡγῆται δίκη .
Quick! With purple let his path be strewn, that Justice may usher him into a home he never hoped to see.

364	τὰ δ’ ἄλλα φροντὶς οὐχ ὕπνῳ νικωμένη θήσει δικαίως σὺν θεοῖς εἱμαρμένα .
The rest my unslumbering vigilance shall order duly, if it please god, even as is ordained.

365	Λήδας γένεθλον , δωμάτων ἐμῶν φύλαξ , ἀπουσίᾳ μὲν εἶπας εἰκότως ἐμῇ ·
Offspring of Leda, guardian of my house, your speech fits well with my absence; for you have drawn it out to ample length.

366 μακρὰν γὰρ ἐξέτεινας ·
for you have drawn it out to ample length.

367	ἀλλ’ ἐναισίμως αἰνεῖν, παρ’ ἄλλων χρὴ τόδ’ ἔρχεσθαι γέρας ·
But becoming praise—this prize should rightly proceed from other lips.

368	καὶ τ- ἄλλα μὴ γυναικὸς ἐν τρόποις ἐμὲ ἅβρυνε, μηδὲ βαρβάρου φωτὸς δίκην χαμαιπετὲς βόαμα προσχάνῃς ἐμοί, μηδ’ εἵμασι στρώσασ’ ἐπίφθονον πόρον τίθει ·
For the rest, pamper me not as if I were a woman, nor, like some barbarian, grovel before me with widemouthed acclaim; and do not draw down envy upon my path by strewing it with tapestries.

369	θεούς τοι τοῖσδε τιμαλφεῖν χρεών ·
It is the gods we must honor thus; but it is not possible for a mortal to tread upon embroidered fineries without fear.

370	ἐν ποικίλοις δὲ θνητὸν ὄντα κάλλεσιν βαίνειν ἐμοὶ μὲν οὐδαμῶς ἄνευ φόβου.
I tell you to revere me not as a god, but as a man.

371	λέγω κατ’ ἄνδρα, μὴ θεόν, σέβειν ἐμέ.
Footmats and embroideries sound diverse in the voice of Rumor; to think no folly is the best gift of the gods.

372	χωρὶς ποδοψήστρων τε καὶ τῶν ποικίλων κληδὼν ἀυτεῖ ·
Only when man’s life comes to its end in prosperity dare we pronounce him happy;

373	καὶ τὸ μὴ κακῶς φρονεῖν θεοῦ μέγιστον δῶρον.
and if I may act in all things as I do now, I have good confidence.

374	ὀλβίσαι δὲ χρὴ βίον τελευτήσαντ’ ἐν εὐεστοῖ φίλῃ.
Only when man’s life comes to its end in prosperity dare we pronounce him happy;

375	εἰ πάντα δ’ ὣς πράσσοιμ’ ἄν, εὐθαρσὴς ἐγώ.
and if I may act in all things as I do now, I have good confidence.

376 καὶ μὴν τόδ’ εἰπὲ μὴ παρὰ γνώμην ἐμοί .
Come now, tell me this, in accordance with your mind.
377 γνώμην μὲν ἴσθι μὴ διαφθεροῦντ’ ἐμέ .
Purpose! Be assured that I shall not corrupt my mind.
378 ηὔξω θεοῖς δείσας ἂν ὧδ’ ἔρδειν τάδε .
You would in fear have vowed to the gods to act thus.
379 εἴπερ τις , εἰδώς γ’ εὖ τόδ’ ἐξεῖπον τέλος .
If someone with full knowledge had pronounced this word.
380 τί δ’ ἂν δοκεῖ σοι Πρίαμος , εἰ τάδ’ ἤνυσεν ;
What do you suppose that Priam would have done, if he had achieved your triumph?
381 ἐν ποικίλοις ἂν κάρτα μοι βῆναι δοκεῖ .
He would have set foot upon the embroideries, I certainly believe.
382 μή νυν τὸν ἀνθρώπειον αἰδεσθῇς ψόγον .
Then do not be be ashamed of mortal reproach.
383 φήμη γε μέντοι δημόθρους μέγα σθένει .
And yet a people’s voice is a mighty power.
384 ὁ δ’ ἀφθόνητός γ’ οὐκ ἐπίζηλος πέλει .
True, yet he who is unenvied is unenviable.
385 οὔτοι γυναικός ἐστιν ἱμείρειν μάχης .
Surely it is not woman’s part to long for fighting.
386 τοῖς δ’ ὀλβίοις γε καὶ τὸ νικᾶσθαι πρέπει .
True, but it is right for the happy victor to yield the victory.
387 ἦ καὶ σὺ νίκην τήνδε δήριος τίεις ;
What? is this the kind of victory in strife that you prize?
388 πιθοῦ ·
Oh yield! 

389 κράτος μέντοι πάρες γ’ ἑκὼν ἐμοί .
Yet of your own free will entrust the victory to me.
390 ἀλλ’ εἰ δοκεῖ σοι ταῦθ’ , ὑπαί τις ἀρβύλας λύοι τάχος , πρόδουλον ἔμβασιν ποδός .
Well, if you will have your way, quick, let someone loose my sandals, which, slavelike, serve the treading of my foot!
391 καὶ τοῖσδέ μ’ ἐμβαίνονθ’ ἁλουργέσιν θεῶν μή τις πρόσωθεν ὄμματος βάλοι φθόνος .
As I walk upon these purple vestments, may I not be struck from afar by any glance of the gods’ jealous eye.
392 πολλὴ γὰρ αἰδὼς δωματοφθορεῖν ποσὶν φθείροντα πλοῦτον ἀργυρωνήτους θ’ ὑφάς .
A terrible shame it is for one’s foot to mar the resources of the house by wasting wealth and costly woven work.
393 τούτων μὲν οὕτω ·
So much for this.
394 τὴν ξένην δὲ πρευμενῶς τήνδ’ ἐσκόμιζε ·
This foreign girl receive into the house with kindness.
395 τὸν κρατοῦντα μαλθακῶς θεὸς πρόσωθεν εὐμενῶς προσδέρκεται .
A god from afar looks graciously upon a gentle master;

397 αὕτη δὲ πολλῶν χρημάτων ἐξαίρετον ἄνθος, στρατοῦ δώρημ’, ἐμοὶ ξυνέσπετο.
But she, the choicest flower of a rich treasure, a gift from the army, has followed in my train.
398 ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀκούειν σοῦ κατέστραμμαι τάδε, εἶμ’ ἐς δόμων μέλαθρα πορφύρας πατῶν.
Since I have been forced to obey you and must listen to you in this, I will tread upon a purple pathway as I pass to my palace halls.
399 ἔστιν θάλασσα, τίς δέ νιν κατασβέσει;
There is the sea (and who shall drain it dry?) 
400 τρέφουσα πολλῆς πορφύρας ἰσάργυρον κηκῖδα παγκαίνιστον, εἱμάτων βαφάς.
producing stain of abundant purple, costly as silver and ever fresh, with which to dye our clothes; 

401 οἶκος δ’ ὑπάρχει τῶνδε σὺν θεοῖς ἅλις ἔχειν;
and of these our house, through the gods, has ample store; 
402 πένεσθαι δ’ οὐκ ἐπίσταται δόμος.
it knows no poverty.

403	πολλῶν πατησμὸν δ’ εἱμάτων ἂν ηὐξάμην, δόμοισι προυνεχθέντος ἐν χρηστηρίοις, ψυχῆς κόμιστρα τῆσδε μηχανωμένῃ.
Vestments enough I would have devoted to be trampled underfoot had it been so ordered in the seat of oracles when I was devising a ransom for your life. 
404	ῥίζης γὰρ οὔσης φυλλὰς ἵκετ’ ἐς δόμους, σκιὰν ὑπερτείνασα σειρίου κυνός.
For if the root still lives, leaves come again to the house and spread their over-reaching shade against the scorching dog star;
405	καὶ σοῦ μολόντος δωματῖτιν ἑστίαν, θάλπος μὲν ἐν χειμῶνι σημαίνεις μολόν ·
so, now that you have come to hearth and home, you show that warmth has come in wintertime;
406	ὅταν δὲ τεύχῃ Ζεὺς ἀπ’ ὄμφακος πικρᾶς οἶνον, τότ’ ἤδη ψῦχος ἐν δόμοις πέλει, ἀνδρὸς τελείου δῶμ’ ἐπιστρωφωμένου.
and again, when Zeus makes wine from the bitter grape, then immediately there is coolness in the house when its rightful lord occupies his halls.
407	Ζεῦ, Ζεῦ τέλειε, τὰς ἐμὰς εὐχὰς τέλει;
O Zeus, Zeus, you who bring things to fulfilment, fulfill my prayers! 
408	μέλοι δέ τοι σοὶ τῶν περ ἂν μέλλῃς τελεῖν.
May you see to that which you mean to fulfill!

409	τίπτε μοι τόδ’ ἐμπέδως δεῖμα προστατήριον καρδίας τερασκόπου ποτᾶται, μαντιπολεῖ δ’ ἀκέλευστος ἄμισθος ἀοιδά, οὐδ’ ἀποπτύσαι δίκαν δυσκρίτων ὀνειράτων θάρσος εὐπειθὲς ἵζει φρενὸς φίλον θρόνον;
Why does this terror so persistently hover standing before my prophetic soul? Why does my song, unbidden and unfed, chant strains of augury? Why does assuring confidence not sit on my heart’s throne and spurn the terror like an uninterpretable dream?

410	χρόνος δ’ ἐπὶ πρυμνησίων ξυνεμβολαῖς ψαμμί’ ἀκτᾶς παρήμησεν, εὖθ’ ὑπ’ Ἴλιον ὦρτο ναυβάτας στρατός.
But Time has collected the sands of the shore upon the cables cast thereon when the shipborn army sped forth for Ilium.

411	πεύθομαι δ’ ἀπ’ ὀμμάτων νόστον, αὐτόμαρτυς ὤν;
Of their coming home I learn with my own eyes and need no other witness.

412	τὸν δ’ ἄνευ λύρας ὅμως ὑμνῳδεῖ θρῆνον Ἐρινύος αὐτοδίδακτος ἔσωθεν θυμός, οὐ τὸ πᾶν ἔχων ἐλπίδος φίλον θράσος.
Yet still my soul within me, self-inspired, intones the lyreless dirge of the avenging spirit, and cannot wholly win its customary confidence of hope.

413	σπλάγχνα δ’ οὔτοι ματᾴζει πρὸς ἐνδίκοις φρεσὶν τελεσφόροις δίναις κυκώμενον κέαρ.
Not for nothing is my bosom disquieted as my heart throbs against my justly fearful breast in eddying tides that warn of some event.

414	εὔχομαι δ’ ἐξ ἐμᾶς ἐλπίδος ψύθη πεσεῖν ἐς τὸ μὴ τελεσφόρον.
But I pray that my expectation may fall out false and not come to fulfilment.

415	μάλα γέ τοι τὸ μεγάλας ὑγιείας ἀκόρεστον τέρμα;
Truly blooming health does not rest content within its due bounds; 

416	νόσος γάρ γείτων ὁμότοιχος ἐρείδει.
for disease ever presses close against it, its neighbor with a common wall.

417	καὶ πότμος εὐθυπορῶν ἀνδρὸς ἔπαισεν ἄφαντον ἕρμα.
So human fortune, when holding onward in straight course, strikes upon a hidden reef.

418	κα

ὶ πρὸ μέν τι χρημάτων κτησίων ὄκνος βαλὼν σφενδόνας ἀπ’ εὐμέτρου, οὐκ ἔδυ πρόπας δόμος πημονᾶς γέμων ἄγαν, οὐδ’ ἐπόντισε σκάφος.
And yet, if with a well-measured throw, caution heaves overboard a portion of the gathered wealth, the whole house, with woe overladen, does not founder nor engulf the hull.

419	πολλά τοι δόσις ἐκ Διὸς ἀμφιλαφής τε καὶ ἐξ ἀλόκων ἐπετειᾶν νῆστιν ὤλεσεν νόσον.
Truly the generous gift from Zeus, rich and derived from yearly furrows, makes an end of the plague of famine.

420	τὸ δ’ ἐπὶ γᾶν πεσὸν ἅπαξ θανάσιμον πρόπαρ ἀνδρὸς μέλαν αἷμα τίς ἂν πάλιν ἀγκαλέσαιτ’ ἐπαείδων;
But a man’s blood, once it has first fallen by murder to earth in a dark tide—who by magic spell shall call it back?

421	οὐδὲ τὸν ὀρθοδαῆ τῶν φθιμένων ἀνάγειν Ζεὺς ἀπέπαυσεν ἐπ’ εὐλαβείᾳ;
Even he who possessed the skill to raise from the dead—did not Zeus make an end of him as a warning?

422	εἰ δὲ μὴ τεταγμένα μοῖρα μοῖραν ἐκ θεῶν εἶργε μὴ πλέον φέρειν, προφθάσασα καρδία γλῶσσαν ἂν τάδ’ ἐξέχει.
And unless one fate ordained of the gods restrains another fate from winning the advantage, my heart would outstrip my tongue and pour forth its fears;

423	νῦν δ’ ὑπὸ σκότῳ βρέμει θυμαλγής τε καὶ οὐδὲν ἐπελπομένα ποτὲ καίριον ἐκτολυπεύσειν ζωπυρουμένας φρενός.
but, as it is, it mutters only in the dark, distressed and hopeless ever to unravel anything in time when my soul’s aflame.

424	εἴσω κομίζου καὶ σύ, Κασάνδραν λέγω, ἐπεί σ’ ἔθηκε Ζεὺς ἀμηνίτως δόμοις κοινωνὸν εἶναι χερνίβων, πολλῶν μέτα δούλων σταθεῖσαν κτησίου βωμοῦ πέλας.
Get inside, you too, Cassandra; since not unkindly has Zeus appointed you to share the holy water of a house where you may take your stand, with many another slave, at the altar of the god who guards its wealth.

425	ἔκβαιν’ ἀπήνης τῆσδε, μηδ’ ὑπερφρόνει.
Get down from the car and do not be too proud;

426	καὶ παῖδα γάρ τοί φασιν Ἀλκμήνης ποτὲ πραθέντα τλῆναι δουλίας μάζης τυχεῖν.
for even Alcmene’s son, men say, once endured to be sold and eat the bread of slavery.

427	εἰ δ’ οὖν ἀνάγκη τῆσδ’ ἐπιρρέποι τύχης, ἀρχαιοπλούτων δεσποτῶν πολλὴ χάρις.
But if such fortune should of necessity fall to the lot of any, there is good cause for thankfulness in having masters of ancient wealth;

428	οἳ δ’ οὔποτ’ ἐλπίσαντες ἤμησαν καλῶς, ὠμοί τε δούλοις πάντα καὶ παρὰ στάθμην.
for they who, beyond their hope, have reaped a rich harvest of possessions, are cruel to their slaves in every way, even exceeding due measure.

429	ἔχεις παρ’ ἡμῶν οἷά περ νομίζεται.
You have from us such usage as custom warrants.

430	σοί τοι λέγουσα παύεται σαφῆ λόγον.
It is to you she has been speaking and clearly.

431	ἐντός δ’ ἂν οὖσα μορσίμων ἀγρευμάτων πείθοι’ ἄν, εἰ πείθοι’.
Since you are in the toils of destiny, perhaps you will obey, if you are so inclined;

432	ἀπειθοίης δ’ ἴσως.
but perhaps you will not.

433	ἀλλ’ εἴπερ ἐστι μὴ χελιδόνος δίκην ἀγνῶτα φωνὴν βάρβαρον κεκτημένη, ἔσω φρενῶν λέγουσα πείθω νιν λόγῳ.
Well, if her language is not strange and foreign, even as a swallow’s, I must speak within her comprehension and move her to comply.

434	ἕπου.
Go with her.

435	τὰ λῷστα τῶν παρεστώτων λέγει.
With things as they now stand, she gives you the best.

436	πιθοῦ λιποῦσα τόνδ’ ἁμαξήρ

η θρόνον.
Do as she bids and leave your seat in the car.

437	οὔτοι θυραίᾳ τῇδ’ ἐμοὶ σχολὴ πάρα τρίβειν.
I have no time to waste with this woman here outside;

438	τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἑστίας μεσομφάλου ἕστηκεν ἤδη μῆλα πρὸς σφαγὰς πάρος, ὡς οὔποτ’ ἐλπίσασι τήνδ’ ἕξειν χάριν.
for already the victims stand by the central hearth awaiting the sacrifice—a joy we never expected to be ours.

439	σὺ δ’ εἴ τι δράσεις τῶνδε, μὴ σχολὴν τίθει.
As for you, if you will take any part, make no delay.

440	εἰ δ’ ἀξυνήμων οὖσα μὴ δέχῃ λόγον, σὺ δ’ ἀντὶ φωνῆς φράζε καρβάνῳ χερί.
But if, failing to understand, you do not catch my meaning, then, instead of speech, make a sign with your barbarian hand.

441	ἑρμηνέως ἔοικεν ἡ ξένη τοροῦ δεῖσθαι.
It is an interpreter and a plain one that the stranger seems to need.

442	τρόπος δὲ θηρὸς ὡς νεαιρέτου.
She bears herself like a wild creature newly captured.

443	ἦ μαίνεταί γε καὶ κακῶν κλύει φρενῶν, ἥτις λιποῦσα μὲν πόλιν νεαίρετον ἥκει, χαλινὸν δ’ οὐκ ἐπίσταται φέρειν, πρὶν αἱματηρὸν ἐξαφρίζεσθαι μένος.
No, she is mad and listens to her wild mood, since she has come here from a newly captured city, and does not know how to tolerate the bit until she has foamed away her fretfulness in blood.

444	οὐ μὴν πλέω ῥίψασ’ ἀτιμασθήσομαι.
No! I will waste no more words upon her to be insulted thus.


445 ἐγὼ δ’, ἐποικτίρω γάρ, οὐ θυμώσομαι.
But I will not be angry, since I pity her.

446 ἴθ’, ὦ τάλαινα, τόνδ’ ἐρημώσασ’ ὄχον, εἴκουσ’ ἀνάγκῃ τῇδε καίνισον ζυγόν.
Come, unhappy one, leave the car; yield to necessity and take upon you this novel yoke.


447	ὀτοτοτοῖ πόποι δᾶ .
Woe, woe, woe! 

448	Ὦπολλον Ὦπολλον 
O Apollo, O Apollo!

449	τί ταῦτ’ ἀνωτότυξας ἀμφὶ Λοξίου ;
Wherefore your cry of woe in Loxias’ name?

450	οὐ γὰρ τοιοῦτος ὥστε θρηνητοῦ τυχεῖν .
He is not the kind of god that has to do with mourners.

451	ὀτοτοτοῖ πόποι δᾶ .
Woe, woe, woe! 
452	Ὦπολλον Ὦπολλον .
O Apollo, O Apollo!


453 ἡ δ’ αὖτε δυσφημοῦσα τὸν θεὸν καλεῖ οὐδὲν προσήκοντ’ ἐν γόοις παραστατεῖν.
Chorus: Once more with ill-omened words she cries to the god who should not be present at times of lamentation.

454 Ἄπολλον Ἄπολλον ἀγυιᾶτ’, ἀπόλλων ἐμός.
Cassandra: Apollo, Apollo! God of the Ways, my destroyer! 

455 ἀπώλεσας γὰρ οὐ μόλις τὸ δεύτερον.
For you have destroyed me—and utterly—this second time.

459 ἆ ποῖ ποτ’ ἤγαγές με;
Cassandra: Ah, what way is this that you have brought me! 

460 πρὸς ποίαν στέγην;
To what a house!

461 πρὸς τὴν Ἀτρειδῶν;

Chorus: To that of Atreus’ sons. 

462 εἰ σὺ μὴ τόδ’ ἐννοεῖς, ἐγὼ λέγω σοι;
If you do not perceive this, I’ll tell it to you.

463 καὶ τάδ’ οὐκ ἐρεῖς ψύθη.
Cassandra: And you shall not say that it is untrue.

464 μισόθεον μὲν οὖν, πολλὰ συνίστορα αὐτόφονα κακὰ καρατόμα, ἀνδροσφαγεῖον καὶ πεδορραντήριον.
Cassandra: No, no, rather to a god-hating house, a house that knows many a horrible butchery of kin, a slaughter-house of men and a floor swimming with blood.

465	ἔοικεν εὔρις ἡ ξένη κυνὸς δίκην εἶναι, ματεύει δ’ ὧν ἀνευρήσει φόνον.
Chorus: The stranger seems keen-scented as a hound; she is on the trail where she will discover blood.

466	μαρτυρίοισι γὰρ τοῖσδ’ ἐπιπείθομαι;
Cassandra: Here is the evidence in which I put my trust!

467	κλαιόμενα τάδε βρέφη σφαγάς, ὀπτάς τε σάρκας πρὸς πατρὸς βεβρωμένας.
Behold those babies bewailing their own butchery and their roasted flesh eaten by their father!

468	τὸ μὲν κλέος σοῦ μαντικὸν πεπυσμένοι ἦμεν;
Chorus: Your fame to read the future had reached our ears; 

469	προφήτας δ’ οὔτινας ματεύομεν.
but we have no need of prophets here.

470	ἰὼ πόποι, τί ποτε μήδεται;
471	τί τόδε νέον ἄχος μέγα μέγ’ ἐν δόμοισι τοῖσδε μήδεται κακὸν ἄφερτον φίλοισιν, δυσίατον;
Cassandra: Alas, what can she be planning[*]? What is this fresh woe she contrives here within, what monstrous, monstrous horror, beyond love’s enduring, beyond all remedy?

472	ἀλκὰ δ’ ἑκὰς ἀποστατεῖ.
 And help[*]stands far away!

473	τούτων ἄιδρίς εἰμι τῶν μαντευμάτων.
Chorus: These prophesyings pass my comprehension;
474	ἐκεῖνα δ’ ἔγνων;
but those I understood—

475	πᾶσα γὰρ πόλις βοᾷ.
the whole city rings with them.

476	ἰὼ τάλαινα, τόδε γὰρ τελεῖς, τὸν ὁμοδέμνιον πόσιν λουτροῖσι φαιδρύνασα — πῶς φράσω τέλος;

Cassandra: Ah, damned woman, will you do this thing? Your husband, the partner of your bed, when you have cheered him with the bath, will you—how shall I tell the end?


477	τάχος γὰρ τόδ’ ἔσται;
Soon it will be done. 

478	προτείνει δὲ χεὶρ ἐκ χερὸς ὀρέγματα.Now this hand, now that, she stretches forth!

479	οὔπω ξυνῆκα;
Chorus: Not yet do I comprehend; for

480	νῦν γὰρ ἐξ αἰνιγμάτων ἐπαργέμοισι θεσφάτοις ἀμηχανῶ.
now, after riddles, I am bewildered by dark oracles.

481	ἒ ἔ , παπαῖ παπαῖ , τί τόδε φαίνεται ;
Ah! Ah! What apparition is this?

482	ἦ δίκτυόν τί γ’ Ἅιδου ;
Is it a net of death? 

483	ἀλλ’ ἄρκυς ἡ ξύνευνος , ἡ ξυναιτία φόνου .
No, it is a snare that shares his bed, that shares the guilt of murder. 

484	στάσις δ’ ἀκόρετος γένει κατολολυξάτω θύματος λευσίμου .
Let the fatal pack, insatiable against the race, raise a shout of jubilance over a victim accursed!

485	ποίαν Ἐρινὺν τήνδε δώμασιν κέλῃ ἐπορθιάζειν ;
What Spirit of Vengeance is this that you bid raise its voice over this house?

486	οὔ με φαιδρύνει λόγος .
Your words do not cheer me.

487	ἐπὶ δὲ καρδίαν ἔδραμε κροκοβαφὴς σταγών , ἅτε καιρία πτώσιμος ξυνανύτει βίου δύντος αὐγαῖς ·
Back to my heart surge the drops of my pallid blood, even as when they drip from a mortal wound, ebbing away as life’s beams sink low;

488	ταχεῖα δ’ ἄτα πέλει .
and death comes speedily.

489	ἆ ἆ , ἰδοὺ ἰδού ·
Ah, ah, see there, see there!
490	ἄπεχε τῆς βοὸς τὸν ταῦρον ·
Keep the bull from his mate!

491	ἐν πέπλοισι μελαγκέρῳ λαβοῦσα μηχανήματι τύπτει ·
She has caught him in the robe and gores him with the crafty device of her black horn!

492	πίτνει δ’ ἐν ἐνύδρῳ τεύχει .
He falls in a vessel of water!

493	δολοφόνου λέβητος τύχαν σοι λέγω .
It is of doom wrought by guile in a murderous bath that I am telling you.

494	οὐ κομπάσαιμ’ ἂν θεσφάτων γνώμων ἄκρος εἶναι, κακῷ δέ τῳ προσεικάζω τάδε.
Chorus: I cannot boast that I am a keen judge of prophecies; but these, I think, spell some evil.

495	ἀπὸ δὲ θεσφάτων τίς ἀγαθὰ φάτις βροτοῖς τέλλεται;
But from prophecies what word of good ever comes to mortals?

496	κακῶν γὰρ διαὶ πολυεπεῖς τέχναι θεσπιῳδὸν φόβον φέρουσιν μαθεῖν.
Through terms of evil their wordy arts bring men to know fear chanted in prophetic strains.

497	ἰὼ ἰὼ ταλαίνας κακόποτμοι τύχαι;
Cassandra: Alas, alas, the sorrow of my ill-starred doom! 

498	τὸ γὰρ ἐμὸν θροῶ πάθος ἐπεγχύδαν.
For it is my own affliction, crowning the cup, that I bewail.

499	ποῖ δή με δεῦρο τὴν τάλαιναν ἤγαγες;
Ah, to what end did you bring me here, unhappy as I am? 

500	οὐδέν ποτ’ εἰ μὴ ξυνθανουμένην.
For nothing except to die—and not alone. What else?

501	τί γάρ;
What then?

502	φρενομανής τις εἶ θεοφόρητος, ἀμφὶ δ’ αὑτᾶς θροεῖς νόμον ἄνομον, οἷά τις ξουθὰ ἀκόρετος βοᾶς, φεῦ, ταλαίναις φρεσίν Ἴτυν Ἴτυν στένουσ’ ἀμφιθαλῆ κακοῖς ἀηδὼν βίον.
Chorus: Frenzied in soul you are, by some god possessed, and you wail in wild strains your own fate, like that brown bird that never ceases making lament (ah me!), and in the misery of her heart moans Itys, Itys, throughout all her days abounding in sorrow, the nightingale.

503	ἰὼ ἰὼ λιγείας μόρον ἀηδόνος.
Cassandra: Alas, alas, the fate of the clear-voiced nightingale!

504	περέβαλον γάρ οἱ πτεροφόρον δέμας θεοὶ γλυκύν τ’ αἰῶνα κλαυμάτων ἄτερ ·
The gods clothed her in a winged form and gave to her a sweet life without tears.

505	ἐμοὶ δὲ μίμνει σχισμὸς ἀμφήκει δορί.
But for me waits destruction by the two-edged sword.

506	πόθεν ἐπισσύτους θεοφόρους τ’ ἔχεις ματαίους δύας, τὰ δ’ ἐπίφοβα δυσφάτῳ κλαγγᾷ μελοτυπεῖς ὁμοῦ τ’ ὀρθίοις ἐν νόμοις;
Chorus: From where come these vain pangs of prophecy that assail you? And why do you mold to melody these terrors with dismal cries blended with piercing strains?

507	πόθεν ὅρους ἔχεις θεσπεσίας ὁδοῦ κακορρήμονας;
How do you know the bounds of the path of your ill-boding prophecy?

508	ἰὼ γάμοι γάμοι Πάριδος ὀλέθριοι φίλων.
Cassandra: Ah, the marriage, the marriage of Paris, that destroyed his friends!

509	ἰὼ Σκαμάνδρου πάτριον ποτόν.
Ah me, Scamander, my native stream!

510	τότε μὲν ἀμφὶ σὰς ἀϊόνας τάλαιν’ ἠνυτόμαν τροφαῖς ·
Upon your banks in bygone days, unhappy maid, was I nurtured with fostering care;

511	νῦν δ’ ἀμφὶ Κωκυτόν τε καὶ Ἀχερουσίους ὄχθας ἔοικα θεσπιῳδήσειν τάχα.
but now by Cocytus and the banks of Acheron, I think, I soon must chant my prophecies.

512	τί τόδε τορὸν ἄγαν ἔπος ἐφημίσω;
Chorus: What words are these you utter, words all too plain? 

513	νεόγονος ἂν ἀΐων μάθοι.
A new-born child hearing them could understand.

514	πέπληγμαι δ’ ὑπαὶ δάκει φοινίῳ δυσαλγεῖ τύχᾳ μινυρὰ κακὰ θρεομένας, θραύματ’ ἐμοὶ κλύειν.
I am smitten with a deadly pain, while, by reason of your cruel fortune, you cry aloud your pitiful moans that break my heart to hear.
    
515	ἰὼ πόνοι πόνοι πόλεος ὀλομένας τὸ πᾶν.
Cassandra: O the sufferings, the sufferings of my city utterly destroyed!

516	ἰὼ πρόπυργοι θυσίαι πατρὸς πολυκανεῖς βοτῶν ποιονόμων;
Cassandra: Alas, the sacrifices my father offered, the many pasturing cattle slain to save its towers!

517	ἄκος δ’ οὐδὲν ἐπήρκεσαν τὸ μὴ πόλιν μὲν ὥσπερ οὖν ἔχει παθεῖν.
Yet they provided no remedy to save the city from suffering even as it has.

518	ἐγὼ δὲ θερμόνους τάχ’ ἐν πέδῳ βαλῶ.
Cassandra: And I, my soul on fire, must soon fall to the ground.

519	ἑπόμενα προτέροισι τάδ’ ἐφημίσω.
Cassandra: Your present speech chimes with your former strain.

520	καί τίς σε κακοφρονῶν τίθησι δαίμων ὑπερβαρὴς ἐμπίτνων μελίζειν πάθη γοερὰ θανατοφόρα;
Chorus: Surely some malignant spirit, falling upon you with heavy swoop, moves you to chant your piteous woes fraught with death.

521	τέρμα δ’ ἀμηχανῶ.
Chorus: But the end I am helpless to discover.

522	καὶ μὴν ὁ χρησμὸς οὐκέτ’ ἐκ καλυμμάτων ἔσται δεδορκὼς νεογάμου νύμφης δίκην;
Cassandra: And now, no more shall my prophecy peer forth from behind a veil like a new-wedded bride;

523	λαμπρὸς δ’ ἔοικεν ἡλίου πρὸς ἀντολὰς πνέων ἐσᾴξειν, ὥστε κύματος δίκην κλύζειν πρὸς αὐγὰς τοῦδε πήματος πολὺ μεῖζον;
but it will rush upon me clear as a fresh wind blowing against the sun’s uprising so as to dash against its rays, like a wave, a woe far mightier than mine. 

524	φρενώσω δ’ οὐκέτ’ ἐξ αἰνιγμάτων.
No more by riddles will I instruct you.

525	καὶ μαρτυρεῖτε συνδρόμως ἴχνος κακῶν ῥινηλατούσῃ τῶν πάλαι πεπραγμένων.
Cassandra: And bear me witness, as, running close behind, I scent the track of crimes done long ago.

526	τὴν γὰρ στέγην τήνδ’ οὔποτ’ ἐκλείπει χορὸς ξύμφθογγος οὐκ εὔφωνος ·
Cassandra: For from this roof never departs a choir chanting in unison, but singing no harmonious tune; for it tells not of good.

527	οὐ γὰρ εὖ λέγει.
Cassandra: And so, gorged on human blood, so as to be the more emboldened,

528	καὶ μὴν πεπωκώς γ’, ὡς θρασύνεσθαι πλέον, βρότειον αἷμα κῶμος ἐν δόμοις μένει, δύσπεμπτος ἔξω, συγγόνων Ἐρινύων.
a revel-rout of kindred Furies haunts the house, hard to be driven away.

529	ὑμνοῦσι δ’ ὕμνον δώμασιν προσήμεναι πρώταρχον ἄτην;
Lodged within its halls they chant their chant, the primal sin; 

530	ἐν μέρει δ’ ἀπέπτυσαν εὐνὰς ἀδελφοῦ τῷ πατοῦντι δυσμενεῖς.
and, each in turn, they spurn with loathing a brother’s bed, for they bitterly spurn the one who defiled it.

531	ἥμαρτον, ἢ θηρῶ τι τοξότης τις ὥς;
Cassandra: Have I missed the mark, or, like a true archer, do I strike my quarry?

532	ἢ ψευδόμαντίς εἰμι θυροκόπος φλέδων;
Or am I prophet of lies, a door-to-door babbler?

533	ἐκμαρτύρησον προυμόσας τό μ’ εἰδέναι λόγῳ παλαιὰς τῶνδ’ ἁμαρτίας δόμων.
Bear witness upon your oath that I know the deeds of sin, ancient in story, of this house.

534	καὶ πῶς ἂν ὅρκος, πῆγμα γενναίως παγέν, παιώνιον γένοιτο;
Chorus: How could an oath, a pledge although given in honor, effect any cure?

535	θαυμάζω δέ σου, πόντου πέραν τραφεῖσαν ἀλλόθρουν πόλιν κυρεῖν λέγουσαν, ὥσπερ εἰ παρεστάτεις.
Chorus: Yet I marvel at you that, though bred beyond the sea, you speak truth of a foreign city, even as if you had been present there.

536	μάντις μ’ Ἀπόλλων τῷδ’ ἐπέστησεν τέλει.
Cassandra: The seer Apollo appointed me to this office.

537	μῶν καὶ θεός περ ἱμέρῳ πεπληγμένος?
Chorus: Can it be that he, a god, was smitten with desire?

538	προτοῦ μὲν αἰδὼς ἦν ἐμοὶ λέγειν τάδε.
Cassandra: Before now I was ashamed to speak of this.

539	ἁβρύνεται γὰρ πᾶς τις εὖ πράσσων πλέον.
Chorus: In prosperity all take on airs.

540	ἀλλ’ ἦν παλαιστὴς κάρτ’ ἐμοὶ πνέων χάριν.
Cassandra: Oh, but he struggled to win me, breathing ardent love for me.

541	ἦ καὶ τέκνων εἰς ἔργον ἤλθετον νόμῳ?
Chorus: Did you in due course come to the rite of marriage?

542	ξυναινέσασα Λοξίαν ἐψευσάμην.
Cassandra: I consented to Loxias but broke my word.

543	ἤδη τέχναισιν ἐνθέοις ᾑρημένη?
Chorus: Were you already possessed by the art inspired of the god?

544	ἤδη πολίταις πάντ’ ἐθέσπιζον πάθη.
Cassandra: Already I prophesied to my countrymen all their disasters.

545	πῶς δῆτ’ ἄνατος ἦσθα Λοξίου κότῳ?
Chorus: How came it then that you were unharmed by Loxias’ wrath?

546	ἔπειθον οὐδέν’ οὐδέν, ὡς τάδ’ ἤμπλακον.
Cassandra: Ever since that fault I could persuade no one of anything.

547	ἡμῖν γε μὲν δὴ πιστὰ θεσπίζειν δοκεῖς.
Chorus: And yet to us at least the prophecies you utter seem true enough.


548	ἰοὺ ἰού , ὢ ὢ κακά .
Ah, ah! Oh, oh, the agony!

549	ὑπ’ αὖ με δεινὸς ὀρθομαντείας πόνος στροβεῖ ταράσσων φροιμίοις δυσφροιμίοις.
Cassandra: Once more the dreadful throes of true prophecy whirl and distract me with their ill-boding onset.

550	ὁρᾶτε τούσδε τοὺς δόμοις ἐφημένους νέους, ὀνείρων προσφερεῖς μορφώμασιν;
Do you see them there—sitting before the house—young creatures like phantoms of dreams?

551	παῖδες θανόντες ὡσπερεὶ πρὸς τῶν φίλων, χεῖρας κρεῶν πλήθοντες οἰκείας βορᾶς, σὺν ἐντέροις τε σπλάγχν', ἐποίκτιστον γέμος, πρέπουσ’ ἔχοντες, ὧν πατὴρ ἐγεύσατο.
Children, they seem, slaughtered by their own kindred, their hands full of the meat of their own flesh; they are clear to my sight, holding their vitals and their inward parts (piteous burden!), which their father tasted.

552	ἐκ τῶνδε ποινὰς φημὶ βουλεύειν τινὰ λέοντ’ ἄναλκιν ἐν λέχει στρωφώμενον οἰκουρόν, οἴμοι, τῷ μολόντι δεσπότῃ ἐμῷ;
For this cause I tell you that a strengthless lion, wallowing in his bed, plots vengeance, a watchman waiting (ah me!) for my master’s coming home—

553	φέρειν γὰρ χρὴ τὸ δούλιον ζυγόν.
yes, my master, for I must bear the yoke of slavery.

554	νεῶν τ’ ἄπαρχος Ἰλίου τ’ ἀναστάτης οὐκ οἶδεν οἷα γλῶσσα μισητῆς κυνὸς λείξασα κ- ἐκτείνασα φαιδρὸν οὖς, δίκην Ἄτης λαθραίου, τεύξεται κακῇ τύχῃ.
The commander of the fleet and the overthrower of Ilium little knows what deeds shall be brought to evil accomplishment by the hateful hound, whose tongue licked his hand, who stretched forth her ears in gladness, like treacherous Ate.

555	τοιάδε τόλμα ·
Cassandra: Such boldness has she.

556	θῆλυς ἄρσενος φονεὺς ἔστιν.
She is a female murderer of a male.

557	τί νιν καλοῦσα δυσφιλὲς δάκος τύχοιμ’ ἄν;
What odious monster shall I fitly call her?

558	ἀμφίσβαιναν, ἢ Σκύλλαν τινὰ οἰκοῦσαν ἐν πέτραισι, ναυτίλων βλάβην, θύουσαν Ἅιδου μητέρ’ ἄσπονδόν τ’ Ἄρη φίλοις πνέουσαν;
An Amphisbaena? Or a Scylla, dwelling in the rocks, a menace to sailors, a bloodthirsty mother to Hades and a ruthless Mars to friends?

559	ὡς δ’ ἐπωλολύξατο ἡ παντότολμος, ὥσπερ ἐν μάχης τροπῇ, δοκεῖ δὲ χαίρειν νοστίμῳ σωτηρίᾳ.
And how the all-daring woman howled in triumph, as in a battle's rout, yet seemed to rejoice in a long-awaited salvation.

560	καὶ τῶνδ’ ὅμοιον εἴ τι μὴ πείθω ·
Even so, it's similar whether or not I persuade you.

561	τί γάρ;
What does it matter?

562	τὸ μέλλον ἥξει.
The future will come.

563	καὶ σύ μ’ ἐν τάχει παρὼν ἄγαν γ’ ἀληθόμαντιν οἰκτίρας ἐρεῖς.
And you, being present soon, shall say with much pity that I was a true prophetess.

564	τὴν μὲν Θυέστου δαῖτα παιδείων κρεῶν ξυνῆκα καὶ πέφρικα, καὶ φόβος μ’ ἔχει κλύοντ’ ἀληθῶς οὐδὲν ἐξῃκασμένα.
Cassandra: Thyestes' banquet on his children's flesh I understood, and I tremble. Terror possesses me as I hear the truth, nothing fashioned out of falsehood to resemble truth.

565	τὰ δ’ ἄλλ’ ἀκούσας ἐκ δρόμου πεσὼν τρέχω.
But as for the rest, I heard I am thrown off the track.

566	Ἀγαμέμνονός σέ φημ’ ἐπόψεσθαι μόρον.
I say you shall look upon Agamemnon dead.

567	εὔφημον, ὦ τάλαινα, κοίμησον στόμα.
Chorus: To words propitious, miserable girl, lull your speech.

568	ἀλλ’ οὔτι παιὼν τῷδ’ ἐπιστατεῖ λόγῳ.
Cassandra: Over what I tell no healing god presides.

569	οὔκ, εἴπερ ἔσται γ’.
Chorus: No, if it is to be; but may it not be so!

570	ἀλλὰ μὴ γένοιτό πως.
Cassandra: You do but pray; their business is to slay.

571	σὺ μὲν κατεύχῃ, τοῖς δ’ ἀποκτείνειν μέλει.
Chorus: What man is he that contrived this wickedness?

572	τίνος πρὸς ἀνδρὸς τοῦτ’ ἄγος πορσύνεται;
Cassandra: Surely you must have missed the meaning of my prophecies.

573	ἦ κάρτα τ- ἄρʼ ἂν παρεκόπης χρησμῶν ἐμῶν, τοῦ γὰρ τελοῦντος οὐ ξυνῆκα μηχανήν.
Chorus: I do not understand the scheme of him who is to do the deed.

574	καὶ μὴν ἄγαν γ’ Ἕλλην’ ἐπίσταμαι φάτιν.
Cassandra: And yet all too well I understand the Greek language.

575	καὶ γὰρ τὰ πυθόκραντα.
Chorus: So too do the Pythian oracles; 

576	δυσμαθῆ δ’ ὅμως .
yet they are hard to understand.

577	παπαῖ , οἷον τὸ πῦρ ·
Oh, oh! What fire! 

578	ἐπέρχεται δέ μοι .
It comes upon me! 

579	ὀτοτοῖ , Λύκει’ Ἄπολλον , οἲ ἐγὼ ἐγώ .
Woe, woe! Lycean Apollo! Ah me, ah me!

580	αὕτη δίπους λέαινα συγκοιμωμένη λύκῳ , λέοντος εὐγενοῦς ἀπουσίᾳ , κτενεῖ με τὴν τάλαιναν ·
This two-footed lioness, who mates with a wolf in the absence of the noble lion, will slay me, miserable as I am.

581	ὡς δὲ φάρμακον τεύχουσα κ- ἐμοῦ μισθὸν ἐνθήσειν κότῳ ἐπεύχεται , θήγουσα φωτὶ φάσγανον ἐμῆς ἀγωγῆς ἀντιτείσασθαι φόνον .
Brewing as it were a drug, she vows that with her wrath she will mix requital for me too, while she whets her sword against her husband, to take murderous vengeance for bringing me here.

582	τί δῆτ’ ἐμαυτῆς καταγέλωτ’ ἔχω τάδε , καὶ σκῆπτρα καὶ μαντεῖα περὶ δέρῃ στέφη ;
Why then do I bear these mockeries of myself, this wand, these prophetic chaplets on my neck?

583	σὲ μὲν πρὸ μοίρας τῆς ἐμῆς διαφθερῶ .
You at least I will destroy before I die myself.

584	ἴτ’ ἐς φθόρον ·
To destruction with you!

585	πεσόντα γ’ ὧδ’ ἀμείβομαι .
And fallen there, thus do I repay you.

586	ἄλλην τιν’ ἄτης ἀντ’ ἐμοῦ πλουτίζετε .
Enrich with doom some other in my place.

587	ἰδοὺ δ’ Ἀπόλλων αὐτὸς ἐκδύων ἐμὲ χρηστηρίαν ἐσθῆτ’ , ἐποπτεύσας δέ με κ- ἐν τοῖσδε κόσμοις καταγελωμένην μέγα φίλων ὑπ’ ἐχθρῶν οὐ διχορρόπως , μάτην — καλουμένη δὲ φοιτὰς ὡς ἀγύρτρια πτωχὸς τάλαινα λιμοθνὴς ἠνεσχόμην — καὶ νῦν ὁ μάντις μάντιν ἐκπράξας ἐμὲ ἀπήγαγ’ ἐς τοιάσδε θανασίμους τύχας .
Look, Apollo himself is stripping me of my prophetic garb—he that saw me mocked to bitter scorn, even in this bravery, by friends turned foes, with one accord, in vain—but, like some vagrant mountebank, called beggar, wretch, starveling, I bore it all.

588	βωμοῦ πατρῴου δ’ ἀντ’ ἐπίξηνον μένει , θερμῷ κοπείσης φοινί

ῳ προσφάγματι .
And now the prophet, having undone me, his prophetess, has brought me to this lethal pass. Instead of my father’s altar a block awaits me, where I am to be butchered in a hot and bloody sacrifice.

589	οὐ μὴν ἄτιμοί γ’ ἐκ θεῶν τεθνήξομεν .
Yet, we shall not die unavenged by the gods;

590	ἥξει γὰρ ἡμῶν ἄλλος αὖ τιμάορος , μητροκτόνον φίτυμα , ποινάτωρ πατρός ·
for there shall come in turn another, our avenger, a scion of the race, to slay his mother and exact requital for his sire;

591	φυγὰς δ’ ἀλήτης τῆσδε γῆς ἀπόξενος κάτεισιν , ἄτας τάσδε θριγκώσων φίλοις ·
an exile, a wanderer, a stranger from this land, he shall return to put the coping-stone upon these unspeakable iniquities of his house.

592	ὀμώμοται γὰρ ὅρκος ἐκ θεῶν μέγας , ἄξειν νιν ὑπτίασμα κειμένου πατρός .
For the gods have sworn a mighty oath that his slain father’s outstretched corpse shall bring him home.

593	τί δῆτ’ ἐγὼ κάτοικτος ὧδ’ ἀναστένω ;
Why then thus raise my voice in pitiful lament?

594	ἐπεὶ τὸ πρῶτον εἶδον Ἰλίου πόλιν πράξασαν ὡς ἔπραξεν , οἳ δ’ εἷλον πόλιν οὕτως ἀπαλλάσσουσιν ἐν θεῶν κρίσει , ἰοῦσα πράξω ·
Since first I saw the city of Ilium fare what it has fared, while her captors, by the gods’ sentence, are coming to such an end, I will go in and meet my fate.

595	τλήσομαι τὸ κατθανεῖν .
I will dare to die.

596	Ἅιδου πύλας δὲ τάσδ’ ἐγὼ προσεννέπω ·
This door I greet as the gates of Death.

597	ἐπεύχομαι δὲ καιρίας πληγῆς τυχεῖν , ὡς ἀσφάδαστος , αἱμάτων εὐθνησίμων ἀπορρυέντων , ὄμμα συμβάλω τόδε .
And I pray that, dealt a mortal stroke, without a struggle, my life-blood ebbing away in easy death, I may close these eyes.

598	ὦ πολλὰ μὲν τάλαινα , πολλὰ δ’ αὖ σοφὴ γύναι , μακρὰν ἔτεινας .
O woman, pitiful exceedingly and exceeding wise, long has been your speech.

599	εἰ δ’ ἐτητύμως μόρον τὸν αὑτῆς οἶσθα , πῶς θεηλάτου βοὸς δίκην πρὸς βωμὸν εὐτόλμως πατεῖς ;
But if, in truth, you have knowledge of your own death, how can you step with calm courage to the altar like an ox, driven by the god?

600	οὐκ ἔστ’ ἄλυξις , οὔ , ξένοι , χρόνον πλέω .
There is no escape; no, my friends, there is none any more.

601	ὁ δ’ ὕστατός γε τοῦ χρόνου πρεσβεύεται , ἥκει τόδ’ ἦμαρ ·
Yet he that is last has the advantage in respect of time. The day has come; flight would profit me but little.

602	σμικρὰ κερδανῶ φυγῇ .
Flight would profit me but little.

603	ἀλλ’ ἴσθι τλήμων οὖσ’ ἀπ’ εὐτόλμου φρενός .
Well, be assured, you brave suffering with a courageous spirit.

604	οὐδεὶς ἀκούει ταῦτα τῶν εὐδαιμόνων .
None who is happy is commended thus.

605	ἀλλ’ εὐκλεῶς τοι κατθανεῖν χάρις βροτῷ .
Yet surely to die nobly is a blessing for mortals.

606	ἰὼ πάτερ σοῦ σῶν τε γενναίων τέκνων .
Alas for you, my father and for your noble children!

607	τί δ’ ἐστὶ χρῆμα ;
What ails you?

608	τίς σ’ ἀποστρέφει φόβος ;
What terror turns you back?

609	φεῦ φεῦ .
Alas, alas!

610	τί τοῦτ’ ἔφευξας ;
Why do you cry alas?

611	εἴ τι μὴ φρενῶν στύγος .
Unless perhaps there is some horror in your soul.

612	φόνον δόμοι πνέουσιν αἱματοσταγῆ , καί πῶς ;τόδ’ ὄζει θυμάτων ἐφεστίων .
This house stinks of blood-dripping slaughter.

613	ὅμοιος ἀτμὸς ὥσπερ ἐκ τάφου πρέπει , οὐ Σύριον ἀγλάισμα δώμασιν λέγεις .
It is like a breath from a charnel-house. 

614	ἀλλ’ εἶμι κ- ἐν δόμοισι κωκύσουσ’ ἐμὴν Ἀγαμέμνονός τε μοῖραν .
Nay, I will go to bew

ail also within the palace my own and Agamemnon’s fate.

615	ἀρκείτω βίος .
Enough of life!

616	ἰὼ ξένοι , οὔτοι δυσοίζω θάμνον ὡς ὄρνις φόβῳ ἄλλως ·
Alas, my friends, not with vain terror do I shrink, as a bird that fears a bush.

617	θανούσῃ μαρτυρεῖτέ μοι τόδε , ὅταν γυνὴ γυναικὸς ἀντ’ ἐμοῦ θάνῃ , ἀνήρ τε δυσδάμαρτος ἀντ’ ἀνδρὸς πέσῃ .
After I am dead, bear witness for me of this—when for me, a woman, another woman shall be slain, and for an ill-wedded man another man shall fall.

618	ἐπιξενοῦμαι ταῦτα δ’ ὡς θανουμένη .
I claim this favor from you now that my hour is come.

619	ὦ τλῆμον , οἰκτίρω σε θεσφάτου μόρου .
Poor woman, I pity you for your death foretold.

620	ἅπαξ ἔτ’ εἰπεῖν ῥῆσιν οὐ θρῆνον θέλω ἐμὸν τὸν αὐτῆς .
Yet once more I would like to speak, but not a dirge.

621	ἡλίῳ δ’ ἐπεύχομαι πρὸς ὕστατον φῶς τοῖς ἐμοῖς τιμαόροις ἐχθροῖς φονεῦσι τοῖς ἐμοῖς τίνειν ὁμοῦ , δούλης θανούσης , εὐμαροῦς χειρώματος .
I pray to the sun, in presence of his latest light, that my enemies may at the same time pay to my avengers a bloody penalty for slaughtering a slave, an easy prey.

622	ἰὼ βρότεια πράγματ’ ·
Alas for human fortune!

623	εὐτυχοῦντα μὲν σκιά τις ἂν τρέψειεν ·
When prosperous, a mere shadow can overturn it;

624	εἰ δὲ δυστυχῇ , βολαῖς ὑγρώσσων σπόγγος ὤλεσεν γραφήν .
if misfortune strikes, the dash of a wet sponge blots out the drawing.

625	καὶ ταῦτ’ ἐκείνων μᾶλλον οἰκτίρω πολύ .
And this last I deem far more pitiable than that.

626	τὸ μὲν εὖ πράσσειν ἀκόρεστον ἔφυ πᾶσι βροτοῖσιν ·
It is the nature of all human kind to be unsatisfied with prosperity.

627	δακτυλοδείκτων δ’ οὔτις ἀπειπὼν εἴργει μελάθρων , μηκέτ’ ἐσέλθῃς , τάδε φωνῶν .
From stately halls none bars it with warning voice that utters the words Enter no more.

628	καὶ τῷδε πόλιν μὲν ἑλεῖν ἔδοσαν μάκαρες Πριάμου ·
So the Blessed Ones have granted to our prince to capture Priam’s town; 

629	θεοτίμητος δ’ οἴκαδ’ ἱκάνει .
and, divinely-honored, he returns to his home. 

630	νῦν δ’ εἰ προτέρων αἷμ’ ἀποτείσῃ καὶ τοῖσι θανοῦσι θανὼν ἄλλων ποινὰς θανάτων ἐπικράνῃ , τίς ἂν ἐξεύξαιτο βροτῶν ἀσινεῖ δαίμονι φῦναι τάδ’ ἀκούων ;
Yet if he now must pay the penalty for the blood shed by others before him, and by dying for the dead
he is to bring to pass retribution of other deaths[*], what mortal man, on hearing this, can boast that he was born with scatheless destiny?

631	ὤμοι , πέπληγμαι καιρίαν πληγὴν ἔσω .
 

632	σῖγα ·
Silence!

633	τίς πληγὴν ἀυτεῖ καιρίως οὐτασμένος ;
Who is this that cries out, wounded by a mortal blow?

634	ὤμοι μάλ’ αὖθις , δευτέραν πεπληγμένος .
Agamemnon:
And once again, alas! I am struck by a second blow.

635	τ- ἔργον εἰργάσθαι δοκεῖ μοι βασιλέως οἰμώγμασιν .
Chorus:
The deed is done, it seems—to judge by the groans of the king.

636	ἀλλὰ κοινωσώμεθ’ ἤν πως ἀσφαλῆ βουλεύματα .
But come, let us take counsel together if there is perhaps some safe plan of action.



637	— ἐγὼ μὲν ὑμῖν τὴν ἐμὴν γνώμην λέγω , πρὸς δῶμα δεῦρ’ ἀστοῖσι κηρύσσειν βοήν .
—I tell you my advice: summon the townsfolk to bring rescue here to the palace.

638	— — ἐμοὶ δ’ ὅπως τάχιστά γ’ ἐμπεσεῖν δοκεῖ καὶ πρᾶγμ’ ἐλέγχειν σὺν νεορρύτῳ ξίφει .
—To my thinking we must burst in and charge them with the deed while the sword is still dripping in their hands.

639	— — κ- ἐγὼ τοιούτου γνώματος κοινωνὸς ὢν ψηφίζομαί τι δρᾶν ·
—I, too, am for taking part in some such plan, and vote for action of some sort. 

640	τὸ μὴ μέλλειν δ’ ἀκμή .
It is no time to keep on delaying.

641	— — ὁρᾶν πάρεστι ·
—It is plain. 

642	φροιμιάζονται γὰρ ὡς τυραννίδος σημεῖα πράσσοντες πόλει .
Their opening act marks a plan to set up a tyranny in the State.

643	— — χρονίζομεν γάρ .
—Yes, because we are wasting time, 

644	οἱ δὲ τῆς μελλοῦς κλέος πέδοι πατοῦντες οὐ καθεύδουσιν χερί .
while they, trampling underfoot that famous name, Delay, allow their hands no slumber.
645	— — οὐκ οἶδα βουλῆς ἧστινος τυχὼν λέγω .

—I know not what plan I could hit on to propose. 

646	τοῦ δρῶντός ἐστι καὶ τὸ βουλεῦσαι πέρι .
It is the doer’s part likewise to do the planning.

647	— — κ- ἐγὼ τοιοῦτός εἰμ’ , ἐπεὶ δυσμηχανῶ λόγοισι τὸν θανόντ’ ἀνιστάναι πάλιν .
—I too am of this mind, for I know no way to bring the dead back to life by mere words.

648	— — ἦ καὶ βίον τείνοντες ὧδ’ ὑπείξομεν δόμων καταισχυντῆρσι τοῖσδ’ ἡγουμένοις ;
—What! To prolong our lives shall we thus submit to the rule of those defilers of the house?

649	— — ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἀνεκτόν ,ἀλλὰ κατθανεῖν κρατεῖ ·
—No, it is not to be endured. No, death would be better.

650	πεπαιτέρα γὰρ μοῖρα τῆς τυραννίδος .
for that would be a milder lot than tyranny.

651	— — ἦ γὰρ τεκμηρίοισιν ἐξ οἰμωγμάτων μαντευσόμεσθα τ- ἀνδρὸς ὡς ὀλωλότος ;
—And shall we, upon the evidence of mere groans, divine that our lord is dead?

652	— — σάφ’ εἰδότας χρὴ τῶνδε θυμοῦσθαι πέρι ·
—We should be sure of the facts before we indulge our wrath.

653	τὸ γὰρ τοπάζειν τοῦ σάφ’ εἰδέναι δίχα .
For surmise differs from assurance.

654	— — ταύτην ἐπαινεῖν πάντοθεν πληθύνομαι , τρανῶς Ἀτρείδην εἰδέναι κυροῦνθ’ ὅπως .
—I am supported on all sides to approve this course—that we get clear assurance how it stands with Atreus’ son.

655	πολλῶν πάροιθεν καιρίως εἰρημένων τ- ἐναντίʼ εἰπεῖν οὐκ ἐπαισχυνθήσομαι .
Much have I said before to serve my need and I shall feel no shame to contradict it now.

656	πῶς γάρ τις ἐχθροῖς ἐχθρὰ πορσύνων , φίλοις δοκοῦσιν εἶναι , πημονῆς ἀρκύστατ’ ἂν φράξειεν , ὕψος κρεῖσσον ἐκπηδήματος ;
For how else could one, devising hate against a hated foe who bears the semblance of a friend, fence the snares of ruin too high to be overleaped?

657	ἐμοὶ δ’ ἀγὼν ὅδ’ οὐκ ἀφρόντιστος πάλαι νείκης παλαιᾶς ἦλθε , σὺν χρόνῳ γε μήν ·
This is the contest of an ancient feud, pondered by me of old, and it has come, however long delayed.

658	ἕστηκα δ’ ἔνθ’ ἔπαισ’ ἐπ’ ἐξειργασμένοις .
I stand where I dealt the blow; my purpose is achieved.

659	οὕτω δ’ ἔπραξα , καὶ τάδ’ οὐκ ἀρνήσομαι ·
Thus have I done the deed; deny it I will not.

660	ὡς μήτε φεύγειν μήτ’ ἀμύνεσθαι μόρον , ἄπειρον ἀμφίβληστρον , ὥσπερ ἰχθύων , περιστιχίζω , πλοῦτον εἵματος κακόν .
Round him, as if to catch a haul of fish, I cast an impassable net—fatal wealth of robe—so that he should neither escape nor ward off doom.

661	παίω δέ νιν δίς ·
Twice I struck him, and with two groans

662	κ- ἐν δυοῖν οἰμωγμάτοιν μεθῆκεν αὑτοῦ κῶλα ·
his limbs relaxed.

663	καὶ πεπτωκότι τρίτην ἐπενδίδωμι , τοῦ κατὰ χθονὸς Διὸς νεκρῶν σωτῆρος εὐκταίαν χάριν .
Once he had fallen, I dealt him yet a third stroke to grace my prayer to the infernal Zeus, the savior of the dead.

664	ο

ὕτω τὸν αὑτοῦ θυμὸν ὁρμαίνει πεσών ·
Fallen thus, he gasped away his life,

665	κ- ἐκφυσιῶν ὀξεῖαν αἵματος σφαγὴν βάλλει μ’ ἐρεμνῇ ψακάδι φοινίας δρόσου , χαίρουσαν οὐδὲν ἧσσον ἢ διοσδότῳ γάνει σπορητὸς κάλυκος ἐν λοχεύμασιν .
and as he breathed forth quick spurts of blood, he struck me with dark drops of gory dew; while I rejoiced no less than the sown earth is gladdened in heaven’s refreshing rain at the birthtime of the flower buds.

666	ὡς ὧδ’ ἐχόντων , πρέσβος Ἀργείων τόδε , χαίροιτ’ ἄν , εἰ χαίροιτ’ , ἐγὼ δ’ ἐπεύχομαι .
Since then the case stands thus, old men of Argos, rejoice, if you would rejoice; as for me, I glory in the deed.

667	εἰ δ’ ἦν πρεπόντων ὥστ’ ἐπισπένδειν νεκρῷ , τῷδ’ ἂν δικαίως ἦν , ὑπερδίκως μὲν οὖν .
And had it been a fitting act to pour libations on the corpse, over him this would have been done justly, more than justly.

668	τοσῶνδε κρατῆρ’ ἐν δόμοις κακῶν ὅδε πλήσας ἀραίων αὐτὸς ἐκπίνει μολών .
With so many accursed lies has he filled the mixing-bowl in his own house, and now he has come home and himself drained it to the dregs.

669	θαυμάζομέν σου γλῶσσαν , ὡς θρασύστομος , ἥτις το

ιόνδ’ ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ κομπάζεις λόγον .
We are shocked at your tongue, how bold-mouthed you are, that over your husband you can utter such a boastful speech.

670	πειρᾶσθέ μου γυναικὸς ὡς ἀφράσμονος ·
You are testing me as if I were a witless woman.

671	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀτρέστῳ καρδίᾳ πρὸς εἰδότας λέγω ·
But my heart does not quail, and I say to you who know it well—

672	σὺ δ’ αἰνεῖν εἴτε με ψέγειν θέλεις ὅμοιον .
and whether you wish to praise or to blame me, it is all one—

673	οὗτός ἐστιν Ἀγαμέμνων , ἐμὸς πόσις , νεκρὸς δέ , τῆσδε δεξιᾶς χερὸς ἔργον , δικαίας τέκτονος .
here is Agamemnon, my husband, now a corpse, the work of this right hand, a just workman.

674	τάδ’ ὧδ’ ἔχει .
So stands the case.

675	τί κακόν , ὦ γύναι , χθονοτρεφὲς ἐδανὸν ἢ ποτὸν πασαμένα ῥυτᾶς ἐξ ἁλὸς ὀρόμενον τόδ’ ἐπέθου θύος , δημοθρόους τ’ ἀράς ;
Woman, what poisonous herb nourished by the earth have you tasted, or what potion drawn from the flowing sea, that you have taken upon yourself this maddened rage and the loud curses voiced by the public?

676	ἀπέδικες ἀπέταμες ·
You have cast him off; you have cut him off;

677	ἀπόπολις δ’ ἔσῃ μῖσος ὄβριμον ἀστοῖς .
and out from the land shall you be cast, a burden of hatred to your people.

678	νῦν μὲν δικάζεις ἐκ πόλεως φυγὴν ἐμοὶ καὶ μῖσος ἀστῶν δημόθρους τ’ ἔχειν ἀράς , οὐδὲν τότ’ ἀνδρὶ τῷδ’ ἐναντίον φέρων ·
It’s now that you would doom me to exile from the land, to the hatred of my people and the execration of the public voice; though then you had nothing to urge against him that lies here.

679	ὃς οὐ προτιμῶν , ὡσπερεὶ βοτοῦ μόρον , μήλων φλεόντων εὐπόκοις νομεύμασιν , ἔθυσεν αὑτοῦ παῖδα , φιλτάτην ἐμοὶ ὠδῖν’ , ἐπῳδὸν Θρῃκίων ἀημάτων .
And yet he, valuing no more than if it had been a beast that perished—though sheep were plenty in his fleecy folds—he sacrificed his own child, she whom I bore with dearest travail, to charm the blasts of Thrace.

680	οὐ τοῦτον ἐκ γῆς τῆσδε χρῆν σ’ ἀνδρηλατεῖν , μιασμάτων ἄποιν’ ;
Is it not he whom you should have banished from this land in requital for his polluting deed?

681	ἐπήκοος δ’ ἐμῶ

ν ἔργων δικαστὴς τραχὺς εἶ .
No! When you arraign what I have done, you are a stern judge.

682	λέγω δέ σοι τοιαῦτ’ ἀπειλεῖν , ὡς παρεσκευασμένης ἐκ τῶν ὁμοίων χειρὶ νικήσαντ’ ἐμοῦ ἄρχειν ·
Well, I warn you: threaten me thus on the understanding that I am prepared, conditions equal, to let you lord it over me if you shall vanquish me by force.

683	ἐὰν δὲ τ- ἔμπαλιν κραίνῃ θεός , γνώσῃ διδαχθεὶς ὀψὲ γοῦν τὸ σωφρονεῖν .
But if a god shall bring the contrary to pass, you shall learn discretion though taught the lesson late.

684	μεγαλόμητις εἶ , περίφρονα δ’ ἔλακες .
You are proud of spirit, and your speech is overbearing.

685	ὥσπερ οὖν φονολιβεῖ τύχᾳ φρὴν ἐπι

μαίνεται , λίπος ἐπ’ ὀμμάτων αἵματος εὖ πρέπει ·
Even as your mind is maddened by your deed of blood, upon your face a stain of blood shows full plain to behold.

686	ἀτίετον ἔτι σὲ χρὴ στερομέναν φίλων τύμμα τύμματι τεῖσαι .
Bereft of all honor, forsaken of your friends, you shall hereafter atone for stroke with stroke,

687	καὶ τήνδ’ ἀκούεις ὁρκίων ἐμῶν θέμιν ·
Listen then to this too, this the righteous sanction on my oath:

688	μὰ τὴν τέλειον τῆς ἐμῆς παιδὸς Δίκην , Ἄτην Ἐρινύν θ’ , αἷσι τόνδ’ ἔσφαξ’ ἐγώ , οὔ μοι φόβου μέλαθρον ἐλπὶς ἐμπατεῖ , ἕως ἂν αἴθῃ πῦρ ἐφ’ ἑστίας ἐμῆς Αἴγισθος , ὡς τὸ πρόσθεν εὖ φρονῶν ἐμοί .
by Justice, exacted for my child, by Ate, by the Avenging Spirit, to whom I sacrificed that man, hope does not tread for me the halls of fear, so long as the fire upon my hearth is kindled by Aegisthus, loyal in heart to me as in days gone by.

689	οὗτος γὰρ ἡμῖν ἀσπὶς οὐ σμικρὰ θράσους .
For he is no slight shield of confidence to me.

690	κεῖται γυναικὸς τῆσδε λυμαντήριος , Χρυσηίδων μείλιγμα τῶν ὑπ’ Ἰλίῳ ·
Here lies the man who did me wrong, plaything of each Chryseis at Ilium;

691	ἥ τ’ αἰχμάλωτος ἥδε καὶ τερασκόπος καὶ κοινόλεκτρος τοῦδε , θεσφατηλόγος πιστὴ ξύνευνος , ναυτίλων δὲ σελμάτων ἰσοτριβής .
and here she lies, his captive, and auguress, and concubine, his oracular faithful whore, yet equally familiar with the seamen’s benches.

692	ἄτιμα δ’ οὐκ ἐπραξάτην .
The pair has met no undeserved fate.

693	ὁ μὲν γὰρ οὕτως , ἡ δέ τοι κύκνου δίκην τὸν ὕστατον μέλψασα θανάσιμον γόον κεῖται , φιλήτωρ τοῦδ’ ·
For he lies thus; while she, who, like a swan, has sung her last lament in death, lies here, his beloved;

694	ἐμοὶ δ’ ἐπήγαγεν εὐνῆς παροψώνημα τῆς ἐμῆς χλιδῆς .
but to me she has brought for my bed an added relish of delight.

695	φεῦ , τίς ἂν ἐν τάχει , μὴ περιώδυνος , μηδὲ δεμνιοτήρης , μόλοι τὸν αἰεὶ φέρουσ’ ἐν ἡμῖν Μοῖρ’ ἀτέλευτον ὕπνον , δαμέντος φύλακος εὐμενεστάτου καὶ πολλὰ τλάντος γυναικὸς διαί ·
Alas! Ah that some fate, free from excess of suffering, nor yet with lingering bed of pain, might come full soon and bring to us everlasting and endless sleep, now that our most gracious guardian has been laid low, who in a woman’s cause had much endured and by a woman’s hand has lost his life.

696	πρὸς γυναικὸς δ’ ἀπέφθισεν βίον .
He has lost his life at a woman’s hand.

697	ἰὼ ἰὼ παράνους Ἑλένα μία τὰς πολλάς , τάς πάνυ πολλὰς ψυχὰς ὀλέσασ’ ὑπὸ Τροίᾳ .
O mad Helen, who did yourself alone destroy these many lives, these lives exceeding many, beneath the walls of Troy.

698	νῦν δὲ τελέαν πολύμναστον ἐπηνθίσω δι’ αἷμ’ ἄνιπτον .
Now you have bedecked yourself with your final crown, that shall long last in memory,

because of blood not to be washed away. 

699	ἦ τις ἦν τότ’ ἐν δόμοις ἔρις ἐρίδματος ἀνδρὸς οἰζύς .
Truly in those days strife, an affliction that has subdued its lord, dwelt in the house.

700	μηδὲν θανάτου μοῖραν ἐπεύχου τοῖσδε βαρυνθείς ·
Do not burden yourself with thoughts such as these, nor invoke upon yourself the fate of death.

701	μηδ’ εἰς Ἑλένην κότον ἐκτρέψῃς , ὡς ἀνδρολέτειρ’ , ὡς μία πολλῶν ἀνδρῶν ψυχὰς Δαναῶν ὀλέσασ’ ἀξύστατον ἄλγος ἔπραξεν .
Nor yet turn your wrath upon Helen, and deem her a slayer of men, as if she alone had destroyed many a Danaan life and had wrought anguish past all cure.

702	μηδ’ εἰς Ἑλένην κότον ἐκτρέψῃς , ὡς ἀνδρολέτειρ’ , ὡς μία πολλῶν ἀνδρῶν ψυχὰς Δαναῶν ὀλέσασ’ ἀξύστατον ἄλγος ἔπραξεν .
Nor yet turn your wrath upon Helen,
and deem her a slayer of men, as if she alone had destroyed many a Danaan life and had wrought anguish past all cure.

703 δαῖμον , ὃς ἐμπίτνεις δώμασι καὶ διφυίοισι Τανταλίδαισιν , κράτος τ’ ἰσόψυχον ἐκ γυναικῶν καρδιόδηκτον ἐμοὶ κρατύνεις .
O Fiend who falls upon this house and Tantalus' two descendants, you who by the hands of women exert a rule matching their temper, a rule bitter to my soul! 

704	ἐπὶ δὲ σώματος δίκαν μοι κόρακος ἐχθροῦ σταθεῖσ’ ἐκνόμως ὕμνον ὑμνεῖν ἐπεύχεται ⏑¯
Perched over his body like a hateful raven, in hoarse notes she chants her song of triumph.

705	νῦν δ’ ὤρθωσας στόματος γνώμην , τὸν τριπάχυντον δαίμονα γέννης τῆσδε κικλήσκων .
Now you have corrected the judgment of your lips in that you name the thrice-gorged Fiend of this race.

706	ἐκ τοῦ γὰρ ἔρως αἱματολοιχὸς νείρᾳ τρέφεται , πρὶν καταλῆξαι τὸ παλαιὸν ἄχος , νέος ἰχώρ .
For by him the lust for lapping blood is fostered in the mouth; so before the ancient wound is healed, fresh blood is spilled.

707	ἦ μέγαν οἰκονόμον δαίμονα καὶ βαρύμηνιν αἰνεῖς , φεῦ φεῦ , κακὸν αἶνον ἀτηρᾶς τύχας ἀκορέστου ·
Truly you speak of a mighty Fiend, haunting the house, and heavy in his wrath (alas, alas!)—an evil tale of catastrophic fate insatiate.

708	ἰὴ ἰή , διαὶ Διὸς παναιτίου πανεργέτα ·
woe, woe, done by will of Zeus, author of all, worker of all!

709	τί γὰρ βροτοῖς ἄνευ Διὸς τελεῖται ;
For what is brought to pass for mortal men save by will of Zeus?

710	τί τῶνδ’ οὐ θεόκραντόν ἐστιν ;
What herein is not wrought of god?

711	

712 ἰὼ ἰὼ βασιλεῦ βασιλεῦ , πῶς σε δακρύσω ;
Alas, alas, my King, my King, how shall I bewail you?

713	φρενὸς ἐκ φιλίας τί ποτ’ εἴπω ;
How voice my heartfelt love for you?

714	κεῖσαι δ’ ἀράχνης ἐν ὑφάσματι τῷδ’ ἀσεβεῖ θανάτῳ βίον ἐκπνέων .
To lie in this spider’s web, breathing forth your life in an impious death!

715	ὤμοι μοι κοίταν τάνδ’ ἀνελεύθερον δολίῳ μόρῳ δαμεὶς δάμαρτος ἐκ χερὸς ἀμφιτόμῳ βελέμνῳ .
Ah me, to lie on this ignoble bed, struck down in treacherous death wrought by a weapon of double edge wielded by the hand of your own wife!

716	αὐχεῖς εἶναι τόδε τ- ἔργον ἐμόν ;
Do you affirm this deed is mine?

717	μηδ’ ἐπιλεχθῇς Ἀγαμεμνονίαν εἶναί μ’ ἄλοχον .
Do not imagine that I am Agamemnon’s spouse.

718	φανταζόμενος δὲ γυναικὶ νεκροῦ τοῦδ’ ὁ παλαιὸς δριμὺς ἀλάστωρ Ἀτρέως χαλεποῦ θοινατῆρος τόνδ’ ἀπέτεισεν , τέλεον νεαροῖς ἐπιθύσας .
A phantom resembling that corpse’s wife, the ancient bitter evil spirit of Atreus, that grim banqueter, has offered him in payment, sacrificing a full-grown victim in vengeance for those slain babes.


719	ὡς μὲν ἀναίτιος εἶ τοῦδε φόνου τίς ὁ μαρτυρήσων ;
That you are innocent of this murder—who will bear you witness?

720	πῶς πῶς ;
How could anyone do so?

721	πατρόθεν δὲ συλλήπτωρ γένοιτ’ ἂν ἀλάστωρ .
And yet the evil genius of his father might well be your accomplice.

722	βιάζεται δ’ ὁμοσπόροις ἐπιρροαῖσιν αἱμάτων μέλας Ἄρης , ὅποι δίκαν προβαίνων πάχνᾳ κουροβόρῳ παρέξει .
By force amid streams of kindred blood, black Havoc presses on to where he shall grant vengeance for the gore of children served for meat.

723	ἰὼ ἰὼ βασιλεῦ βασιλεῦ , πῶς σε δακρύσω ;
Alas, alas, my King, my King, how shall I bewail you?

724	φρενὸς ἐκ φιλίας τί ποτ’ εἴπω ;
How voice my heartfelt love for you?



725	κεῖσαι δ’ ἀράχνης ἐν ὑφάσματι τῷδ’ ἀσεβεῖ θανάτῳ βίον ἐκπνέων .
To lie in this spider’s web, breathing forth your life in an impious death!

726	ὤμοι μοι κοίταν τάνδ’ ἀνελεύθερον δολίῳ μόρῳ δαμεὶς ἐ

κ χερὸς ἀμφιτόμῳ βελέμνῳ .
Ah me, to lie on this ignoble bed, struck down in treacherous death wrought by a weapon of double edge wielded by your own wife’s hand!

727	οὔτ’ ἀνελεύθερον οἶμαι θάνατον τῷδε γενέσθαι .
Neither do I think he met an ignoble death.

728	οὐδὲ γὰρ οὗτος δολίαν ἄτην οἴκοισιν ἔθηκ’ ;
And did he not himself by treachery bring ruin on his house?

729	ἀλλ’ ἐμὸν ἐκ τοῦδ’ ἔρνος ἀερθέν .
Yet, as he has suffered—

730	τὴν πολυκλαύτην Ἰφιγενείαν , ἄξια δράσας ἄξια πάσχων μηδὲν ἐν Ἅιδου μεγαλαυχείτω , ξιφοδηλήτῳ , θανάτῳ τείσας ἅπερ ἦρξεν .
—worthy prize of worthy deed—for what he did to my sweet flower, shoot sprung from him, the sore-wept Iphigenia, let him make no great boasts in the halls of Hades, since with death dealt him by the sword he has paid for what he first began.

731	ἀμηχανῶ φροντίδος στερηθεὶς εὐπάλαμον μέριμναν ὅπα τράπωμαι , πίτνοντος οἴκου .
Bereft of any ready expedient of thought, I am bewildered where to turn now that the house is tottering.

732	δέδοικα δ’ ὄμβρου κτύπον δομοσφαλῆ τὸν αἱματηρόν ·
I fear the beating storm of bloody rain that shakes the house;

733	ψακὰς δὲ λήγει .
no longer does it descend in drops.

734	δίκην δ’ ἐπ’ ἄλλο πρᾶγμα θηγάνει βλάβης πρὸς ἄλλαις θηγάναισι μοῖρα .
Yet on other whetstones Destiny is sharpening justice for another evil deed.

735	ἰὼ γᾶ γᾶ , εἴθ’ ἔμ’ ἐδέξω , πρὶν τόνδ’ ἐπιδεῖν ἀργυροτοίχου δροίτης κατέχοντα χάμευναν .
O Earth, Earth, if only you had taken me to yourself before ever I had lived to see my lord occupying a lowly bed of a silver-sided bath!

736	τίς ὁ θάψων νιν ;
Who shall bury him?

737	τίς ὁ θρηνήσων ;
Who shall lament him?

738	ἦ σὺ τόδ’ ἔρξαι τλήσῃ , κτείνασ’ ἄνδρα τὸν αὑτῆς ἀποκωκῦσαι ψυχῇ τ’ ἄχαριν χάριν ἀντ’ ἔργων μεγάλων ἀδίκως ἐπικρᾶναι ;
Will you harden your heart to do this—you who have slain your own husband—to lament for him and crown your unholy work with an uncharitable gift to his spirit, atoning for your monstrous deeds?

739	τίς δ’ ἐπιτύμβι

ον αἶνον ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ θείῳ σὺν δακρύοις ἰάπτων ἀληθείᾳ φρενῶν πονήσει ;
And who, as with tears he utters praise over the hero’s grave, shall sorrow in sincerity of heart?

740	οὐ σὲ προσήκει τὸ μέλημ’ ἀλέγειν τοῦτο ·
To care for that duty is no concern of yours.

741	πρὸς ἡμῶν κάππεσε , κάτθανε , καὶ καταθάψομεν , οὐχ ὑπὸ κλαυθμῶν τῶν ἐξ οἴκων , ἀλλ’ Ἰφιγένειά νιν ἀσπασίως θυγάτηρ , ὡς χρή , πατέρ’ ἀντιάσασα πρὸς ὠκύπορον πόρθμευμ’ ἀχέων περὶ χεῖρε βαλοῦσα φιλήσει .
By our hands down he fell, down to death, and down below shall we bury him—but not with wailings from his household. No! Iphigenia, his daughter, as is due, shall meet her father lovingly at the swift-flowing ford of sorrows, and shall fling her arms around him and kiss him.

742	ὄνειδος ἥκει τόδ’ ἀντ’ ὀνείδους .
Reproach thus meets reproach in turn—

743	δύσμαχα δ’ ἔστι κρῖναι .
hard is the struggle to decide.

744	φέρει φέροντ’ , ἐκτίνει δ’ ὁ καίνων .
The spoiler is despoiled, the slayer pays penalty.

745	μίμνει δὲ μίμνοντος ἐν θρόνῳ Διὸς παθεῖν τὸν ἔρξαντα ·
Yet, while Zeus remains on his throne, it remains true that to him who does it shall be done;

746	θέσμιον γάρ .
for it is law.

747	τίς ἂν γονὰν ἀραῖον ἐκβάλοι δόμων ;
Who can cast from out the house the seed of the curse?

748	κεκόλληται γένος πρὸς ἄτᾳ .
The race is bound fast in calamity.

749	ἐς τόνδ’ ἐνέβης ξὺν ἀληθείᾳ χρησμόν .
Upon this divine deliverance have you rightly touched.

750	ἐγὼ δ’ οὖν ἐθέλω δαίμονι τῷ Πλεισθενιδῶν ὅρκους θεμένη τάδε μὲν στέργειν , δύστλητά περ ὄνθ’ ·
As for me, however, I am willing to make a sworn compact with the Fiend of the house of Pleisthenes, that I will be content with what is done, hard to endure though it is.

751	ὃ δὲ λοιπόν , ἰόντ’ ἐκ τῶνδε δόμων ἄλλην γενεὰν τρίβειν θανάτοις αὐθένταισι .
Henceforth he shall leave this house and bring tribulation upon some other race by murder of kin.

752	κτεάνων τε μέρος βαιὸν ἐχούσῃ πᾶν ἀπόχρη μοι μανίας μελάθρων ἀλληλοφόνους ἀφελούσῃ .
A small part of the wealth is fully enough for me, if I may but rid these halls of the frenzy of mutual murder.

753	ὦ φέγγος εὖφρον ἡμέρας δικηφόρου .
Hail gracious light of the day of retribution!

754	φαίην ἂν ἤδη νῦν βροτῶν τιμαόρους θεοὺς ἄνωθεν γῆς ἐποπτεύειν ἄχη , ἰδὼν ὑφαντοῖς ἐν πέπλοις , Ἐρινύων τὸν ἄνδρα τόνδε κείμενον φίλως ἐμοί , χερὸς πατρῴας ἐκτίνοντα μηχανάς .
At last the hour has come when I can say that the gods who avenge mortal men look down from on high upon the crimes of earth, now that, to my joy, I behold this man lying here in a robe spun by the Avenging Spirits and making full payment for the deeds contrived in craft by his father’s hand.

755	Ἀτρεὺς γὰρ ἄρχων τῆσδε γῆς , τούτου πατήρ , πατέρα Θυέστην τὸν ἐμόν , ὡς τορῶς φράσαι , αὑτοῦ δ’ ἀδελφόν , ἀμφίλεκτος ὢν κράτει , ἠνδρηλάτησεν ἐκ πόλεώς τε καὶ δόμων .
For Atreus, lord of this land, this man’s father, who was my father Thyestes’ brother and thus his own brother, challenged in his sovereignty, drove forth, from city and from home, Thyestes.

756	καὶ προστρόπαιος ἑστίας μολὼν πάλιν τλήμων Θυέστης μοῖραν η

ὕρετ’ ἀσφαλῆ , τὸ μὴ θανὼν πατρῷον αἱμάξαι πέδον , αὐτός ·
And when he had come back as a suppliant to his hearth, unhappy Thyestes secured such safety for his lot as not himself to suffer death and stain with his blood his native soil.

757	ξένια δὲ τοῦδε δύσθεος πατὴρ Ἀτρεύς , προθύμως μᾶλλον ἢ φίλως , πατρὶ τ- ἐμῷ , κρεουργὸν ἦμαρ εὐθύμως ἄγειν δοκῶν , παρέσχε δαῖτα παιδείων κρεῶν .
But Atreus, the godless father of this slain man, with welcome more hearty than kind, on the pretense that he was cheerfully celebrating a happy day by serving meat, served up to my father as entertainment a banquet of his own children’s flesh.

758	τὰ μὲν ποδήρη καὶ χερῶν ἄκρους κτέν

ας ἔθρυπτ’ , ἄνωθεν ἀνδρακὰς καθήμενος .
The toes and fingers he broke off, sitting apart.

759	ἄσημα δ’ αὐτῶν αὐτίκ’ ἀγνοίᾳ λαβὼν ἔσθει βορὰν ἄσωτον , ὡς ὁρᾷς , γένει .
And when all unwittingly my father had quickly taken servings that he did not recognize, he ate a meal which, as you see, has proved fatal to his race.

760	κ- ἔπειτʼ ἐπιγνοὺς ἔργον οὐ καταίσιον ᾤμωξεν , ἀμπίπτει δ’ ἀπὸ σφαγὴν ἐρῶν , μόρον δ’ ἄφερτον Πελοπίδαις ἐπεύχεται , λάκτισμα δείπνου ξυνδίκως τιθεὶς ἀρᾷ , οὕτως ὀλέσθαι πᾶν τὸ Πλεισθένους γένος .
Now, discovering his unhallowed deed, he uttered a great cry, reeled back, vomiting forth the slaughtered flesh, and invoked an unbearable curse upon the line of Pelops, kicking the banquet table to aid his curse, thus perish all the race of Pleisthenes!

761	ἐκ τῶνδέ σοι πεσόντα τόνδ’ ἰδεῖν πάρα .
This is the reason that you see this man fallen here.

762	κ- ἐγὼ δίκαιος τοῦδε τοῦ φόνου ῥαφεύς .
I am he who planned this murder and with justice.

763	τρίτον γὰρ ὄντα μ’ ἐπὶ δυσαθλίῳ πατρὶ συνεξελαύνει τυτθὸν ὄντ’ ἐν σπαργάνοις ·
For together with my hapless father he drove me out, me his third child, as yet a baby in swaddling-clothes.

764	τραφέντα δ’ αὖθις ἡ δίκη κατήγαγεν .
But grown to manhood, justice has brought me back again.

765	καὶ τοῦδε τ- ἀνδρὸς ἡψάμην θυραῖος ὤν , πᾶσαν συνάψας μηχανὴν δυσβουλίας .
Exile though I was, I laid my hand upon my enemy, compassing every device of cunning to his ruin.

766	οὕτω καλὸν δὴ καὶ τὸ κατθανεῖν ἐμοί , ἰδόντα τοῦτον τῆς δίκης ἐν ἕρκεσιν .
So even death would be sweet to me now that I behold him in justice’s net.

767	Αἴγισθ’ , ὑβρίζειν ἐν κακοῖσιν οὐ σέβω .
Aegisthus, excessive triumph amid distress I do not honor.

768	σὺ δ’ ἄνδρα τόνδε φὴς ἑκὼν κατακτανεῖν , μόνος δ’ ἔποικτον τόνδε βουλεῦσαι φόνον ·
You say that of your own intent you slew this man and did alone plot this pitiful murder.

769	οὔ φημ’ ἀλύξειν ἐν δίκῃ τὸ σὸν κάρα δημορριφεῖς , σάφ’ ἴσθι , λευσίμους ἀράς .
I tell you in the hour of justice that you yourself, be sure of that, will not escape the people’s curses and death by stoning at their hand.

770	σὺ ταῦτα φωνεῖς νερτέρᾳ προσήμενος κώπῃ , κρατούντων τῶν ἐπὶ ζυγῷ δορός ;
You speak like that, you who sit at the lower oar when those upon the higher bench control the ship?

771	γνώσῃ γέρων ὢν ὡς διδάσκεσθαι βαρὺ τῷ τηλικούτῳ , σωφρονεῖν εἰρημένον .
Old as you are, you shall learn how bitter it is at your age to be schooled when prudence is the lesson set before you.

772	δεσμὸς δὲ καὶ τὸ γῆρας αἵ τε νήστιδες δύαι διδάσκειν ἐξοχώταται φρενῶν ἰατρομάντεις .
Bonds and the pangs of hunger are far the best doctors of the spirit when it comes to instructing the old.

773	οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὁρῶν τάδε ;
Do you have eyes and lack understanding?

774	πρὸς κέντρα μὴ λάκτιζε , μὴ παίσας μογῇς .
Do not kick against the goads lest you strike to your own hurt.

775	γύναι , σὺ τοὺς ἥκοντας ἐκ μάχης μένων οἰκουρὸ

ς εὐνὴν ἀνδρὸς αἰσχύνων ἅμα ἀνδρὶ στρατηγῷ τόνδ’ ἐβούλευσας μόρον ;
Woman that you are! Skulking at home and awaiting the return of the men from war, all the while defiling a hero’s bed, did you contrive this death against a warrior chief?

776	καὶ ταῦτα τ- ἔπη κλαυμάτων ἀρχηγενῆ .
These words of yours likewise shall prove a source of tears.

777	Ὀρφεῖ δὲ γλῶσσαν τὴν ἐναντίαν ἔχεις .
The tongue of Orpheus is quite the opposite of yours.

778	ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἦγε πάντ’ ἀπὸ φθογγῆς χαρᾷ , σὺ δ’ ἐξορίνας νηπίοις ὑλάγμασιν ἄξῃ ·
He led all things by the rapture of his voice; but you, who have stirred our wrath by your silly yelping, shall be led off yourself.

779	κρατηθεὶς δ’ ἡμερώτερος φανῇ .
You will appear tamer when put down by force.

780	ὡς δὴ σύ μοι τύραννος Ἀργείων ἔσῃ , ὃς οὐκ , ἐπειδὴ τῷδ’ ἐβούλευσας μόρον , δρᾶσαι τόδ’ ἔργον οὐκ ἔτλης αὐτοκτόνως .
As if you would ever truly be my master here in Argos, you who did contrive our king’s death, and then had not the courage to do this deed of murder with your own hand!

781	τὸ γὰρ δολῶσαι πρὸς γυναικὸς ἦν σαφῶς ·
Because to ensnare him was clearly the woman’s part;

782	ἐγὼ δ’ ὕποπτος ἐχθρὸς ἦ παλαιγενής .
I was suspect as his enemy of old.

783	ἐκ τῶν δὲ τοῦδε χρημάτων πειράσομαι ἄρχειν πολιτῶν ·
However, with his gold I shall endeavor to control the people;

784	τὸν δὲ μὴ πειθάνορα ζεύξω βαρείαις οὔτι μοι σειραφόρον κριθῶντα πῶλον ·
and whoever is unruly, him I’ll yoke with a heavy collar, and in truth he shall be no well-fed trace-horse!

785	ἀλλ’ ὁ δυσφιλὴς σκότῳ λιμὸς ξύνοικος μαλθακόν σφ’ ἐπόψεται .
No! Loathsome hunger that houses with darkness shall see him gentle.

786	τί δὴ τὸν ἄνδρα τόνδ’ ἀπὸ ψυχῆς κακῆς οὐκ αὐτὸς ἠνάριζες , ἀλλά νιν γυνὴ χώρας μίασμα καὶ θεῶν ἐγχωρίων ἔκτειν’ ;
Why then, in the baseness of your soul, did you not kill him yourself, but leave his slaying to a woman, a plague to her country and her country’s gods?

787	Ὀρέστης ἆρά που βλέπει φάος , ὅπως κατελθὼν δεῦρο πρευμενεῖ τύχῃ ἀμφοῖν γένηται τοῖνδε παγκρατὴς φονεύς ;
Oh, does Orestes perhaps still behold the light, that, with favoring fortune, he may come home and be the slayer of this pair with victory complete?

787	ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ δοκεῖς τάδ’ ἔρδειν καὶ λέγειν , γνώσῃ τάχα εἶα δή , φίλοι λοχῖται , τ- ἔργον οὐχ ἑκὰς τόδε .
Oh well, since you plan to act and speak like that, you shall be taught a lesson soon. On guard, my trusty guardsmen, your work lies close to hand.

788	εἶα δή , ξίφος πρόκωπον πᾶς τις εὐτρεπιζέτω .
On guard then! Let every one make ready his sword with hand on hilt.

789	ἀλλὰ κ- ἐγὼ μὴν πρόκωπος οὐκ ἀναίνομαι θανεῖν .
My hand too is laid on my sword hilt, and I do not shrink from death.

790	δεχομένοις λέγεις θανεῖν σε ·
Death for yourself, you say. We hail the omen.

791	τὴν τύχην δ’ αἱρούμεθα .
We welcome fortune’s test.

792	μηδαμῶς , ὦ φίλτατ’ ἀνδρῶν , ἄλλα δράσωμεν κακά .
No, my dearest, let us work no further ills.

793	ἀλλὰ καὶ τάδ’ ἐξαμῆσαι πολλά , δύστηνον θέρος .
Even these are many to reap, a wretched harvest.

794	πημονῆς δ’ ἅλις γ’ ὑπάρχει ·
Of woe we have enough;

795	μηδὲν αἱματώμεθα .
let us have no bloodshed.

796	στείχετ’ αἰδοῖοι γέροντες πρὸς δόμους , πεπρωμένοις τούσδε πρὶν παθεῖν εἴξαντες ὥρᾳ ·
Venerable elders, go back to your homes, and yield in time to destiny before you come to harm.

797	χρῆν τάδ’ ὡς ἐπράξαμεν .
What we did had to be done.

798	εἰ δέ τοι μόχθων γένοιτο τῶνδ’ ἅλις , δεχοίμεθ’ ἄν , δαίμονος χηλῇ βαρείᾳ δυστυχῶς πεπληγμένοι .
But should this trouble prove enough, we will accept it, sorely battered as we are by the heavy hand of fate.

799	ὧδ’ ἔχει λόγος γυναικός , εἴ τις ἀξιοῖ μαθεῖν .
Such is a woman’s counsel, if any care to learn from it.

800	ἀλλὰ τούσδ’ ἐμοὶ ματαίαν γλῶσσαν ὧδ’ ἀπανθίσαι κ- ἐκβαλεῖν ἔπη τοιαῦτα δαίμονος πειρωμένους , σώφρονος γνώμης θ’ ἁμαρτεῖν τὸν κρατοῦντά θ’ ὑβρίσαι .
But to think that these men should let their wanton tongues thus blossom into speech against me and cast about such insults, putting their fortune to the test! To reject wise counsel and insult their master!

801	οὐκ ἂν Ἀργείων τόδ’ εἴη , φῶτα προσσαίνειν κακόν .
This is not the Argive way, to tolerate insolence from subjects.

802	ἀλλ’ ἐγώ σ’ ἐν ὑστέραισιν ἡμέραις μέτειμ’ ἔτι .
Yet I will make you pay for this in days to come.

803	οὔκ , ἐὰν δαίμων , Ὀρέστην δεῦρ’ ἀπευθύνῃ μολεῖν .
No, not even if some god were to guide Orestes here.

804	οἶδ’ ἐγὼ φεύγοντας ἄνδρας ἐλπίδας σιτουμένους .
I know how men nourish vain hopes when they are fugitives.

805	πρᾶσσε , πιαίνου , μιαίνων τὴν δίκην , ἐπεὶ πάρα .
Go on, glut yourself, defiling justice, since you have the power.

806	ἴσθι μοι δώσων ἄποινα τῆσδε μωρίας χάριν .
But know that you will pay the penalty for this folly.

807	κόμπασον θαρσῶν , ἀλέκτωρ ὥστε θηλείας πέλας .
Strut as you will, like a cockerel by his hen.

808	μὴ προτιμήσῃς ματαίων τῶνδ’ ὑλαγμάτων ·
Do not value these empty outcries too highly;

809	ἐγὼ καὶ σὺ θήσομεν κρατοῦντε τῶνδε δωμάτων καλῶς .
I and you shall rule this house well, as masters.