1 Τάδε μὲν Περσῶν τῶν οἰχομένων Ἑλλάδ’ ἐς αἶαν πιστὰ καλεῖται , καὶ τῶν ἀφνεῶν καὶ πολυχρύσων ἑδράνων φύλακες , κατὰ πρεσβείαν οὓς αὐτὸς ἄναξ Ξέρξης βασιλεὺς Δαρειογενὴς εἵλετο χώρας ἐφορεύειν .
Here we are, the faithful Council of the Persians, who have gone to the land of Hellas, we who serve as warders of the royal abode, rich in bountiful store of gold, we whom Xerxes, our King, Darius’ royal son, himself selected, by virtue of our rank and years, to be the guardians of his realm.

2 ἀμφὶ δὲ νόστῳ τῷ βασιλείῳ καὶ πολυχρύσου στρατιᾶς ἤδη κακόμαντις ἄγαν ὀρσολοπεῖται θυμὸς ἔσωθεν .
Yet as regards the return of our King and of his host, so richly decked out in gold, the soul within my breast is distressed and presages disaster.

3 πᾶσα γὰρ ἰσχὺς Ἀσιατογενὴς ᾤχωκε , νέον δ’ ἄνδρα βαΰζει , κ- οὔτε τις ἄγγελος οὔτε τις ἱππεὺς ἄστυ τὸ Περσῶν ἀφικνεῖται ·
For the whole populace of the Asian nation has come and murmurs against its youthful King, nor does any courier or horseman arrive at the city of the Persians.

4 οἵτε τὸ Σούσων ἠδ’ Ἀγβατάνων καὶ τὸ παλαιὸν Κίσσιον ἕρκος προλιπόντες ἔβαν , τοὶ μὲν ἐφ’ ἵππων .
5 τοὶ δ’ ἐπὶ ναῶν , πεζοί τε βάδην πολέμου στῖφος παρέχοντες ·
who left behind them the walled defence of Susa and Agbatana and Cissa’s ancient ramparts, and went forth, some on horseback, some in galleys, others on foot, presenting a dense array of war.

6 οἷος Ἀμίστρης ἠδ’ Ἀρταφρένης καὶ Μεγαβάτης ἠδ’ Ἀστάσπης , ταγοὶ Περσῶν , βασιλῆς βασιλέως ὕποχοι μεγάλου , σοῦνται , στρατιᾶς πολλῆς ἔφοροι , τοξοδάμαντές τ’ ἠδ’ ἱπποβάται , φοβεροὶ μὲν ἰδεῖν , δεινοὶ δὲ μάχην ψυχῆς εὐτλήμονι δόξῃ ·
Such are Amistres and Artaphrenes and Megabates and Astaspes, marshals of the Persians; kings themselves, yet vassals of the Great King, they press on, commanders of an enormous host, skilled in archery and horsemanship, formidable to look upon and fearful in battle through the valiant resolve of their souls.

7 Ἀρτεμβάρης θ’ ἱππιοχάρμης καὶ Μασίστρης , ὅ τε τοξοδάμας ἐσθλὸς Ἰμαῖος , Φαρανδάκης θ’ , ἵππων τ’ ἐλατὴρ Σοσθάνης .
Artembares, too, who fights from his chariot, and Masistres, and noble Imaeus, skilled with the bow, and Pharandaces, and Sosthanes, who urges on his steeds.

8 ἄλλους δ’ ὁ μέγας καὶ πολυθρέμμων Νεῖλος ἔπεμψεν ·
Others in addition the mighty, fecund Nile sent forth —

9 Σουσισκάνης , Πηγασταγὼν Αἰγυπτογενής , ὅ τε τῆς ἱερᾶς Μέμφιδος ἄρχων μέγας Ἀρσάμης , τάς τ’ ὠγυγίους Θήβας ἐφέπων Ἀριόμαρδος , καὶ ἑλειοβάται ναῶν ἐρέται δεινοὶ πλῆθός τ’ ἀνάριθμοι .
Susiscanes, Pegastagon of Egyptian lineage, mighty Arsames, lord of sacred Memphis, Ariomardus, governor of ancient Thebes, and the marsh-dwelling oarsmen, well-skilled and countless in number.

10 ἁβροδιαίτων δ’ ἕπεται Λυδῶν ὄχλος , οἵ τ’ ἐπίπαν ἠπειρογενὲς κατέχουσιν ἔθνος , τοὺς Μητρογαθὴς Ἀρκτεύς τ’ ἀγαθός , βασιλῆς δίοποι , καὶ πολύχρυσοι Σάρδεις ἐπόχους πολλοῖς ἅρμασιν ἐξορμῶσιν , δίρρυμά τε καὶ τρίρρυμα τέλη , φοβερὰν ὄψιν προσιδέσθαι .
Behind them follows a throng of luxurious Lydians and those who hold in subjection all the people of the mainland, whom Metrogathes and brave Arcteus, their regal commanders, and Sardis rich in gold sent forth, riding in many a chariot, in ranks with three and four steeds abreast, a spectacle terrible to behold.

11	στεῦται δ’ ἱεροῦ Τμώλου πελάται ζυγὸν ἀμφιβαλεῖν δούλιον Ἑλλάδι , Μάρδων , Θάρυβις , λόγχης ἄκμονες , καὶ ἀκοντισταὶ Μυσοί ·
They too who live by sacred Tmolus pledge themselves
to cast the yoke of slavery upon Hellas—Mardon, Tharybis, anvils of the lance, and the Mysians, hurlers of the javelin. 


12	Βαβυλὼν δ’ ἡ πολύχρυσος πάμμικτον ὄχλον πέμπει σύρδην , ναῶν τ’ ἐπόχους καὶ τοξουλκῷ λήματι πιστούς ·
Babylon, also, teeming with gold, sends a mixed host arrayed in a long line, both mariners borne in galleys
and those who rely on their skill in archery. 

13	τὸ μαχαιροφόρον τ’ ἔθνος ἐκ πάσης Ἀσίας ἕπεται δειναῖς βασιλέως ὑπὸ πομπαῖς .
The nation too which wears the sabre follows from every part of Asia in the fearful procession of the King.

14	τοιόνδ’ ἄνθος Περσίδος αἴας οἴχεται ἀνδρῶν , οὓς πέρι πᾶσα χθὼν Ἀσιῆτις θρέψασα πόθῳ στένεται μαλερῷ , τοκέες τ’ ἄλοχοί θ’ ἡμερολεγδὸν τείνοντα χρόνον τρομέονται .
Such are the warriors, the flower of the Persian land,
who have departed, and in fierce longing for them the whole land of Asia, their foster-nurse, laments, while parents and wives, as they count the days, shudder at the lengthening delay.

15	πεπέρακεν μὲν ὁ περσέπτολις ἤδη βασίλειος στρατὸς εἰς ἀντίπορον γείτονα χώραν , λινοδέσμῳ σχεδίᾳ πορθμὸν ἀμείψας Ἀθαμαντίδος Ἕλλας , πολύγομφον ὅδισμα ζυγὸν ἀμφιβαλὼν αὐχένι πόντου .
The royal army, dealing destruction to cities, has already passed to the neighboring land upon the facing shore, and this they did by crossing the Hellespont, named for the daughter of Athamas, on a bridge of boats made fast with cables, thereby casting a tightly constructed roadway as a yoke upon the neck of the sea.

16	πολυάνδρου δ’ Ἀσίας θούριος ἄρχων ἐπὶ πᾶσαν χθόνα ποιμανόριον θεῖον ἐλαύνει διχόθεν , πεζονόμον τ’ ἔκ τε θαλάσσας , ἐχυροῖσι πεποιθὼς στυφελοῖς ἐφέταις , χρυσογόνου γενεᾶς ἰσόθεος φώς .
The fiery lord of populous Asia is leading his wondrous warrior-flock against the whole earth in two divisions, on foot and by the sea, putting his trust in his stalwart and stern commanders; he himself, a god-like hero whose race is sprung from gold.

17	κυάνεον δ’ ὄμμασι λεύσσων φονίου δέργμα δράκοντος , πολύχειρ καὶ πολυναύτας , Σύριόν θ’ ἅρμα διώκων , ἐπάγει δουρικλύτοις ἀνδράσι τοξόδαμνον Ἄρη .
With eyes flashing with the dark glare of a deadly dragon, attended by soldiers and mariners in great numbers, and speeding his Syrian chariot, he leads against a people renowned for the spear a warlike host of archers.

18	δόκιμος δ’ οὔτις ὑποστὰς μεγάλῳ ῥεύματι φωτῶν ἐχυροῖς ἕρκεσιν εἴργειν ἄμαχον κῦμα θαλάσσας ·
And there is no man skilled to withstand the mighty stream of men, and with strong barriers keep out the sea’s invincible surge

; for Persia’s host cannot be withstood, and her men are courageous.

19	ἀπρόσοιστος γὰρ ὁ Περσᾶν στρατὸς ἀλκίφρων τε λαός .
For by the will of the gods Fate has held sway

20	θεόθεν γὰρ κατὰ Μοῖρ’ ἐκράτησεν τὸ παλαιόν , ἐπέσκηψε δὲ Πέρσαις πολέμους πυργοδαΐκτους διέπειν ἱππιοχάρμας τε κλόνους πόλεών τ’ ἀναστάσεις .
since ancient time, and has ordained for the Persians the pursuit of rampart-destroying war, the turmoil of fighting horsemen, and the storming of cities.

21	ἔμαθον δ’ εὐρυπόροιο θαλάσσας πολιαινομένας πνεύματι λάβρῳ ἐσορᾶν πόντιον ἄλσος , πίσυνοι λεπτοδόμοις πείσμασι λαοπόροις τε μαχαναῖς .
And they have learned to look upon the precinct of the deep when the broad-wayed sea whitens to foam beneath the tempest’s blast, trusting in their finely wrought cables and their devices which give passage to their army.

22	δολόμητιν δ’ ἀπάταν θεοῦ τίς ἀνὴρ θνατὸς ἀλύξει ;
Yet the insidious guile of god—what mortal man can escape it?

23	τίς ὁ κραιπνῷ ποδὶ πήδημα τόδ’ εὐπετῶς ἀνᾴσσων ;
Who with agile foot can lightly overleap and escape its toils?

24	φιλόφρων γὰρ παρασαίνει βροτὸν εἰς ἄρκυας Ἄτα , τόθεν οὐκ ἔστιν ὕπερθέν νιν ἄνατον ἐξαλύξαι .
For Delusion, with her fair appearance, lures men astray into her snares, from which it is not possible to escape without meeting with disaster.

25	ταῦτά μοι μελαγχίτων φρὴν ἀμύσσεται φόβῳ , ὀᾶ , Περσικοῦ στρατεύματος τοῦδε , μὴ πόλις πύθηται κένανδρον μέγ’ ἄστυ Σουσίδος ,
Therefore my heart is wrapped in gloom and is racked with fear for the Persian army lest the state learn that the mighty capital of Susa is empty of men.

26	καὶ τὸ Κισσίων πόλισμ’ ἀντίδουπον ᾄσεται , ὀᾶ , τοῦτ’ ἔπος γυναικοπληθὴς ὅμιλος ἀπύων , βυσσίνοις δ’ ἐν πέπλοις πέσῃ λακίς .
Fearful I am too that as bands of women cry aloud woe, the Cissian stronghold will raise a resounding shout responsive to the beating of breasts, and that there will be a tearing of fine linen robes.

27	πᾶς γὰρ ἱππηλάτας καὶ πεδοστιβὴς λεὼς σμῆνος ὣς ἐκλέλοιπεν μελισσᾶν σὺν ὀρχάμῳ στρατοῦ , τὸν ἀμφίζευκτον ἐξαμείψας ἀμφοτέρας ἅλιον πρῶνα κοινὸν αἴας .
For all the men-at-arms, those who urge on steeds and those who march along the plain, have left the city and gone forth, like bees in a swarm, together with the captain of the host. They have crossed the headland, projecting into the sea and common to either continent, through which both shores are bridged.

28	λέκτρα δ’ ἀνδρῶν πόθῳ πίμπλαται δακρύμασιν ·
And marriage-beds are filled with tears through longing for husbands;

29	Περσίδες δ’ ἁβροπενθεῖς ἑκάστα πόθῳ φιλάνορι τὸν αἰχμάεντα θοῦρον εὐνατῆρ’ ἀποπεμψαμένα λείπεται μονόζυξ .
each Persian woman has sent to the field her warlike and fiery consort, and now in grief and longing for her beloved lord, is left forsaken by her mate.

30 ἀλλ’ ἄγε , Πέρσαι , τόδ’ ἐνεζόμενοι στέγος ἀρχαῖον , φροντίδα κεδνὴν καὶ βαθύβουλον θώμεθα , χρεία δὲ προσήκει , πῶς ἄρα πράσσει Ξέρξης βασιλεὺς Δαρειογενής , τὸ πατρωνύμιον γένος ἡμέτερον ·
But come, Persians, let us take our place on the steps of this ancient palace and devise some wise and deeply-pondered counsel—for need of this has come upon us—as to how Xerxes our King, Darius’ son, scion of our own race as his forefather’s name declares, is faring. 

31 πότερον τόξου ῥῦμα τὸ νικῶν , ἢ δορικράνου λόγχης ἰσχὺς κεκράτηκεν .
Is it the drawing of the bow that has triumphed, or is it the might of the sharp spear-head which has prevailed?

32 ἀλλ’ ἥδε θεῶν ἴσον ὀφθαλμοῖς φάος ὁρμᾶται μήτηρ βασιλέως , βασίλεια δ’ ἐμή ·
But look, here is a light like the eyes of the god, the mother of our king, my Queen. 

33	προσπίτνω ·
I bow low before her. 

34	καὶ προσφθόγγοις δὲ χρεὼν αὐτὴν πάντας μύθοισι προσαυδᾶν .
It is fitting also that we all address her with words of salutation. 

35 ὦ βαθυζώνων ἄνασσα Περσίδων ὑπερτάτη , μῆτερ ἡ Ξέρξου γεραιά , χαῖρε , Δαρείου γύναι ·
O Queen, most exalted of Persia’s deep-girdled women, venerable mother of Xerxes, wife of Darius, all hail! 

36	θεοῦ μὲν εὐνάτειρα Περσῶν , θεοῦ δὲ καὶ μήτηρ ἔφυς , εἴ τι μὴ δαίμων παλαιὸς νῦν μεθέστηκε στρατῷ .
You were the consort of the Persian’s god, and of another god the mother, that is, unless its former good fortune has now forsaken our host.

37	ταῦτα δὴ λιποῦσ’ ἱκάνω χρυσεοστόλμους δόμους καὶ τὸ Δαρείου τε κ- ἐμὸν κοινὸν εὐνατήριον .
For this very reason, leaving behind the gold-adorned halls and the shared marital chamber of Darius and myself, I have come.

38	κ- ἐμὲ καρδίαν ἀμύσσει φροντίς ·
And my heart is torn with worry;

39	ἐς δ’ ὑμᾶς ἐρῶ μῦθον οὐδαμῶς ἐμαυτῆς οὖσ’ ἀδείμαντος , φίλοι , μὴ μέγας πλοῦτος κονίσας οὖδας ἀντρέψῃ ποδὶ ὄλβον , ὃν Δαρεῖος ἦρεν οὐκ ἄνευ θεῶν τινος .
So, my friends, I will speak to you, not without fear myself, about a concern that a great wealth, swirling up dust, may overturn the fortune raised by Darius, not without the help of some god.

40	ταῦτά μοι διπλῆ μέριμνα φραστός ἐστιν ἐν φρεσίν , μήτε χρημάτων ἀνάνδρων πλῆθος ἐν τιμῇ σέβειν μήτ’ ἀχρημάτοισι λάμπειν φῶς ὅσον σθένος πάρα .
This worry weighs doubly on my mind: not to esteem a mass of wealth that lacks men, nor to have light shine on those who are without wealth, as much as their strength allows.

41	ἔστι γὰρ πλοῦτός γ’ ἀμεμφής , ἀμφὶ δ’ ὀφθαλμῷ φόβος ·
For while wealth is blameless, around it hovers fear;

42	ὄμμα γὰρ δόμων νομίζω δεσπότου παρουσίαν .
For I consider the presence of the master to be the true eye of the house.

43	πρὸς τάδ’ ὡς οὕτως ἐχόντων τῶνδε , σύμβουλοι λόγου τοῦδέ μοι γένεσθε , Πέρσαι , γηραλέα πιστώματα ·
In light of these circumstances, become advisors to me in this matter, Persians, you my

aged and faithful counselors;

44	πάντα γὰρ τὰ κέδν’ ἐν ὑμῖν ἐστί μοι βουλεύματα .
For all my precious plans and counsels lie with you.

45	εὖ τόδ’ ἴσθι , γῆς ἄνασσα τῆσδε , μή σε δὶς φράσαι μήτ’ ἔπος μήτ’ ἔργον ὧν ἂν δύναμις ἡγεῖσθαι θέλῃ ·
Know this well, ruler of this land, that you need not speak twice, neither in word nor deed, for whatever you wish to command;

46	εὐμενεῖς γὰρ ὄντας ἡμᾶς τῶνδε συμβούλους καλεῖς .
For you call upon us as your advisors, and we are well-disposed towards these matters.

47	πολλοῖς μὲν αἰεὶ νυκτέροις ὀνείρασιν ξύνειμ’ , ἀφ’ οὗπερ παῖς ἐμὸς στείλας στρατὸν Ἰαόνων γῆν οἴχεται πέρσαι θέλων ·
I have been troubled by many nightly dreams ever since my son dispatched his army, intending to conquer the land of the Ionians;

48	ἀλλ’ οὔτι πω τοιόνδ’ ἐναργὲς εἰδόμην ὡς τῆς πάροιθεν εὐφρόνης ·
but never before have I had such a vivid vision as I did last night.

49	λέξω δέ σοι .
I will tell it to you.

50	ἐδοξάτην μοι δύο γυναῖκ’ εὐείμονε , ἡ μὲν πέπλοισι Περσικοῖς ἠσκημένη , ἡ δ’ αὖτε Δωρικοῖσιν , εἰς ὄψιν μολε

ῖν , μεγέθει τε τῶν νῦν ἐκπρεπεστάτα πολύ , κάλλει τ’ ἀμώμω , καὶ κασιγνήτα γένους τ- αὐτοῦ ·
In my dream, I saw two women of noble bearing, one adorned in Persian robes, the other in Dorian dress. They appeared to me, surpassing in stature and flawless in beauty, sisters of the same family.

51	πάτραν δ’ ἔναιον ἡ μὲν Ἑλλάδα κλήρῳ λαχοῦσα γαῖαν , ἡ δὲ βάρβαρον .
One dwelled in the land of Hellas, having received it as her lot, and the other in the land of the barbarians.

52	τούτω στάσιν τιν’ , ὡς ἐγὼ ’δόκουν ὁρᾶν , τεύχειν ἐν ἀλλήλαισι ·
Between them, as it seemed to me, a strife arose, one against the other;

53	παῖς δ’ ἐμὸς μαθὼν κατεῖχε κ- ἐπράυνεν , ἅρμασιν δ’ ὕπο ζεύγνυσιν αὐτὼ καὶ λέπαδν’ ἐπ’ αὐχένων τίθησι .
and my son, having learned of this, tried to control and calm them. He yoked them both to his chariot and placed collars upon their necks.

54	κ- ἡ μὲν τῇδ’ ἐπυργοῦτο στολῇ ἐν ἡνίαισί τ’ εἶχεν εὔαρκτον στόμα , ἡ δ’ ἐσφάδαζε , καὶ χεροῖν ἔντη δίφρου διασπαράσσει καὶ ξυναρπάζει βίᾳ ἄνευ χαλινῶν καὶ ζυγὸν θραύει μέσον .
But the one in Persian attire submitted to the reins and kept her mouth well within bounds, while the other struggled, tearing apart the car's harness with her hands, dragging it violently, breaking the yoke, and was unrestrained by bits or bridle.

55	πίπτει δ’ ἐμὸς παῖς , καὶ πατὴρ παρίσταται Δαρεῖος οἰκτείρων σφε ·
Then my son fell, and his father Darius appeared, standing by him, filled with pity;

56	τὸν δ’ ὅπως ὁρᾷ Ξέρξης , πέπλους ῥήγνυσιν ἀμφὶ σώματι .
and when Xerxes saw him, he tore the garments around his body.

57	καὶ ταῦτα μὲν δὴ νυκτὸς εἰσιδεῖν λέγω .
And these things, I declare, I saw in the night.

58	ἐπεὶ δ’ ἀνέστην καὶ χεροῖν καλλιρρόου ἔψαυσα πηγῆς , σὺν θυηπόλῳ χερὶ βωμὸν προσέστην , ἀποτρόποισι δαίμοσιν θέλουσα θῦσαι πέλανον , ὧν τέλη τάδε .
After I rose and washed my hands in the flowing waters of a spring, I approached an altar with my attendant to make an offering of a sacrificial cake to the avertive deities, for whom such rites are due.

59	ὁρῶ δὲ φεύγοντ’ αἰετὸν πρὸς ἐσχάραν Φοίβου ·
Then I saw an eagle fleeing to the altar of Phoebus;

60	φόβῳ δ’ ἄφθογγος ἐστάθην , φίλοι ·
and I stood there speechless with fear, my friends.

61	μεθύστερον δὲ κίρκον εἰσορῶ δρόμῳ πτεροῖς ἐφορμαίνοντα καὶ χηλαῖς κάρα τίλλονθ’ ·
Then I saw a falcon, swooping down with spread wings, attacking the eagle and plucking at its head with its talons;

62	ὁ δ’ οὐδὲν ἄλλο γ’ ἢ πτήξας δέμας παρεῖχε .
and the eagle offered no resistance but merely cowered under the assault.

63	ταῦτ’ ἔμοιγε δείματ’ εἰσιδεῖν , ὑμῖν δ’ ἀκούειν .
These were fearsome sights for me to behold, and for you to hear about.

64	εὖ γὰρ ἴστε , παῖς ἐμὸς πράξας μὲν εὖ θαυμαστὸς ἂν γένοιτ’ ἀνήρ , κακῶς δὲ πράξας , οὐχ ὑπεύθυνος πόλει , σωθεὶς δ’ ὁμοίως τῆσδε κοιρανεῖ χθονός .
For well you know, if my son acts well, he would be a man to be admired, but if he acts poorly, he is not accountable to the state, and if he returns safely, he will likewise rule over this land as before.

65	οὔ σε βουλόμεσθα , μῆτερ , οὔτ’ ἄγαν φοβεῖν λόγοις οὔτε θαρσύνειν .
Mother, we do not wish to alarm you excessively with words, nor to unduly bolster your courage.

66	θεοὺς δὲ προστροπαῖς ἱκνουμένη , εἴ τι φλαῦρον εἶδες , αἰτοῦ τῶνδ’ ἀποτροπὴν τελεῖν , τὰ δ’ ἀγάθ’ ἐκτελῆ γενέσθαι σοί τε καὶ τέκνοις σέθεν καὶ πόλει φίλοις τε πᾶσι .
But when you approach the gods with supplications, if you have seen anything inauspicious, ask for the avertance of these omens and for the fulfillment of all good things for yourself, your children, the city, and all your friends.

67	δεύτερον δὲ χρὴ χοὰς Γῇ τε καὶ φθιτοῖς χέασθαι ·
Secondly, it is necessary to pour libations to Earth and to the dead;

68	πρευμενῶς δ’ αἰτοῦ τάδε , σὸν πόσιν Δαρεῖον , ὅνπερ φὴς ἰδεῖν κατ’ εὐφρόνην , ἐσθλά σοι πέμπειν τέκνῳ τε γῆς ἔνερθεν ἐς φάος , τ- ἔμπαλιν δὲ τῶνδε γαίᾳ κάτοχα μαυροῦσθαι σκότῳ .
And kindly ask this of your husband Darius, whom you say you saw in your dream, to send good things to you and to your son from beneath the earth to the light, and conversely, for the reverse of these to be held beneath the earth and mourn in the darkness.

69	ταῦτα θυμόμαντις ὤν σοι πρευμενῶς παρῄνεσα .
As one who divines by instinct, I have offered you this advice with goodwill.

70	εὖ δὲ

 πανταχῇ τελεῖν σοι τῶνδε κρίνομεν πέρι .
And we judge it best for you to perform these things in every way.

71	ἀλλὰ μὴν εὔνους γ’ ὁ πρῶτος τῶνδ’ ἐνυπνίων κριτὴς παιδὶ καὶ δόμοις ἐμοῖσι τήνδ’ ἐκύρωσας φάτιν .
But you, the first interpreter of these dreams, have confirmed this message with goodwill towards my child and my household.

72	ἐκτελοῖτο δὴ τὰ χρηστά ·
May the good omens indeed be fulfilled;

73	ταῦτα δ’ , ὡς ἐφίεσαι , πάντα θήσομεν θεοῖσι τοῖς τ’ ἔνερθε γῆς φίλοις , εὖτ’ ἂν εἰς οἴκους μόλωμεν .
and all these things, as you desire, we will place in the hands of the gods and our beloved ones beneath the earth, as soon as we return to our homes.

74	κεῖνα δ’ ἐκμαθεῖν θέλω , ὦ φίλοι , ποῦ τὰς Ἀθήνας φασὶν ἱδρῦσθαι χθονός .
But now, my friends, I wish to learn where they say Athens is situated on the earth.

75	τῆλε πρὸς δυσμαῖς ἄνακτος Ἡλίου φθινασμάτων .
Far away, towards the west, where the sun sets.

76	ἀλλὰ μὴν ἵμειρ’ ἐμὸς παῖς τήνδε θηρᾶσαι πόλιν ;
But did my son indeed yearn to capture this city?

77	πᾶσα γὰρ γένοιτ’ ἂν Ἑλλὰς βασιλέως ὑπήκοος .
For then all of Hellas would become subject to the king.

78	ὧδέ τις πάρεστιν αὐτοῖς ἀνδροπλήθεια στρατοῦ ;
Do they possess such a multitude of soldiers?

79	καὶ στρατὸς τοιοῦτος , ἔρξας πολλὰ δὴ Μήδους κακά .
And such an army, having inflicted much harm upon the Medes.

80	καὶ τί πρὸς τούτοισιν ἄλλο ;
And what else do they have?

81	πλοῦτος ἐξαρκὴς δόμοις ;
Is their wealth sufficient for their homes?

82	ἀργύρου πηγή τις αὐτοῖς ἐστι , θησαυρὸς χθονός .
Do they possess a source of silver, a treasure of the earth?

83	πότερα γὰρ τοξουλκὸς αἰχμὴ διὰ χεροῖν αὐτοῖς πρέπει ;
Or is the arrow's point more fitting through their hands?

84	οὐδαμῶς ·
Not at all;

85	ἔγχη σταδαῖα καὶ φεράσπιδες σαγαί .
They prefer long spears and shield-bearing troops.

86	τίς δὲ ποιμάνωρ ἔπεστι κ- ἐπιδεσπόζει στρατῷ ;
And who is the shepherd and ruler over their army?

87	οὔτινος δοῦλοι κέκληνται φωτὸς οὐδ’ ὑπήκοοι .
They are not called slaves or subjects of any man.

88	πῶς ἂν οὖν μένοιεν ἄνδρας πολεμίους ἐπήλυδας ;
How then could they withstand the attacks of enemy men?

89	ὥστε Δαρείου πολύν τε καὶ καλὸν φθεῖραι στρατόν .
So as to destroy Darius' great and glorious army.

90	δεινά τοι λέγεις ἰόντων τοῖς τεκοῦσι φροντίσαι .
You speak terrible things, giving those who bore them cause for concern.

91	ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν τάχ’ εἴσῃ πάντα νημερτῆ λόγον.
But to me, it seems that soon all will be clear and truthful.

92	τοῦδε γὰρ δράμημα φωτὸς Περσικὸν πρέπει μαθεῖν , καὶ φέρει σαφές τι πρᾶγος ἐσθλὸν ἢ κακὸν κλύειν .
For it is fitting to learn of this Persian man's actions, and to hear some clear account of whether the outcome is good or bad.

93	ὦ γῆς ἁπάσης Ἀσιάδος πολίσματα , ὦ Περσὶς αἶα καὶ πολὺς πλούτου λιμήν , ὡς ἐν μιᾷ πληγῇ κατέφθαρται πολὺς ὄλβος , τὸ Περσῶν δ’ ἄνθος οἴχεται πεσόν .
Oh, cities of all Asia, oh Persian land and great haven of wealth, how in one blow much prosperity has been destroyed, and the flower of the Persians has fallen and perished!

94	ὤμοι , κακὸν μὲν πρῶτον ἀγγέλλειν κακά ·
Alas, it is a dreadful thing to be the first to report bad news.

95	ὅμως δ’ ἀνάγκη πᾶν ἀναπτύξαι πάθος , Πέρσαι ·
Nevertheless, it is necessary to unfold the entire tale of woe, Persians;

96	στρατὸς γὰρ πᾶς ὄλωλε βαρβάρων .
for the entire army of the barbarians is lost.

97	ἄνι’ ἄνια κακὰ νεόκοτα καὶ δάι’ ·
Bring forth new sorrows and wail;

98	οὐκ ἔστι τῆμος ἄλλο πλὴν τῷδε φθίνοντι στρατῷ .
There is no other lamentation but for this perishing army.

99	αἰαῖ , διαίνεσθε , Πέρσαι , τόδ’ ἄχος κλύοντες .
Alas, rend your garments, Persians, hearing this distress.

100	ὡς πάντα γ’ ἔστ’ ἐκεῖνα διαπεπραγμένα ·
For all those things have indeed come to pass;

101	αὐτὸς δ’ ἀέλπτως νόστιμον βλέπω φάος .
And unexpectedly, I behold the light of return.

102	ἦ μακροβίοτος ὅδε γέ τις αἰὼν ἐφάνθη γεραιοῖς , ἀκούειν τόδε πῆμ’ ἄελπτον .
Indeed, this life has become too long for the elders, to hear such unexpected sorrow.

103	καὶ μὴν παρών γε κ- οὐ λόγους ἄλλων κλύων , Πέρσαι , φράσαιμ’ ἂν οἷ’ ἐπορσύνθη κακά .
And yet, being present and not just hearing the words of others, Persians, I can tell of the evils that were brought forth.

104	ὀτοτοτοῖ , μάταν τὰ πολλὰ βέλεα παμμιγῆ γᾶς ἀπ’ Ἀσίδος ἦλθε δᾴαν ἐφ’ Ἑλλάδα χώραν .
Alas, in vain did the many arrows, mixed from all the lands of Asia, come to waste upon the land of Hellas.

105 πλήθουσι νεκρῶν δυσπότμως ἐφθαρμένων Σαλαμῖνος ἀκταὶ πᾶς τε πρόσχωρος τόπος .
The shores of Salamis and all the neighboring areas are crowded with the bodies of the dead, tragically perished.

106 ὀτοτοτοῖ , φίλων ἁλίδονα μέλεα πολυβαφῆ κατθανόντα λέγεις φέρεσθαι πλάγκτ’ ἐν διπλάκεσσιν .
Alas, alas! You speak of the beloved bodies of our friends, stained with the sea, tossed about on the waves and shores.

107 οὐδὲν γὰρ ἤρκει τόξα , πᾶς δ’ ἀπώλλυτο στρατὸς δαμασθεὶς ναΐοισιν ἐμβολαῖς .
The bows were of no avail, and the entire army was lost, defeated by the assaults of the ships.

108 ἴυζ’ ἄποτμον Πέρσαις δυσαιανῆ βοὰν δᾴοις , ὡς πάντα παγκάκως ἔφθισαν .
Mourn, Persians, a dire and dismal cry for the calamity, as everything has ended in utter ruin.

109 αἰαῖ στρατοῦ φθαρέντος .
Woe for the army that has been destroyed!

110	ὦ πλεῖστον ἔχθος ὄνομα Σαλαμῖνος κλύειν.
O name of Salamis most odious to my ears!

111	φεῦ, τῶν Ἀθηνῶν ὡς στένω μεμνημένος.
Alas, how I groan when I recall the memory of Athens!

112	στυγναί γ’ Ἀθᾶναι δᾴοις.
Chorus: Ah, hateful indeed is Athens to her foes.

113	μεμνῆσθαί τοι πάρα ὡς πολλὰς Περσίδων μάταν ἔκτισαν εὔνιδας ἠδ’ ἀνάν

δρους.
Now must we remember how many Persian women she has deprived of sons and husbands, lost all in vain.

114	σιγῶ πάλαι δύστηνος ἐκπεπληγμένη κακοῖς.
Atossa: Long have I kept silent in my misery, struck with dismay at our disaster.

115	ὑπερβάλλει γὰρ ἥδε συμφορὰ τὸ μήτε λέξαι μήτ’ ἐρωτῆσαι πάθη.
For this calamity is so great that it is not possible to say or even to ask about its extent.

116	ὅμως δ’ ἀνάγκη πημονὰς βροτοῖς φέρειν θεῶν διδόντων.
Nevertheless, mortals must endure affliction when it is heaven-sent.

117	πᾶν δ’ ἀναπτύξας πάθος λέξον καταστάς, κ- εἰ στένεις κακοῖς ὅμως.
Compose yourself, and even though you groan at our loss, relate the sum of our disaster and speak out!

118	τίς οὐ τέθνηκε, τίνα δὲ καὶ πενθήσομεν τῶν ἀρχελείων, ὅστ’ ἐπὶ σκηπτουχίᾳ ταχθεὶς ἄνανδρον τάξιν ἠρήμου θανών;
Who is there that is not dead? Whom of our leaders must we bewail? Who, appointed to wield command, by death left his post empty, without its chief?

119	Ξέρξης μὲν αὐτὸς ζῇ τε καὶ βλέπει φάος.
Messenger: Xerxes himself lives and beholds the light.

120	ἐμοῖς μὲν εἶπας δώμασιν φάος μέγα καὶ λευκὸν ἦμαρ νυκτὸς ἐκ μελαγχίμου.
Atossa: The words you utter bring a great light of joy into my house, and bright day after night wrapped in gloom.

121	Ἀρτεμβάρης δὲ μυρίας ἵππου βραβεὺς στύφλους παρ’ ἀκτὰς θείνεται Σιληνιῶν.
Messenger: But Artembares, commander of ten thousand cavalrymen, is being battered now against Silenia’s cruel shore.

122	κ- ὁ χιλίαρχος Δαδάκης πληγῇ δορὸς πήδημα κοῦφον ἐκ νεὼς ἀφήλατο.
And Dadaces, leader of a thousand men, leapt, struck by a spear, with a nimble bound from his ship.

123	Τενάγων τ’ ἀριστεὺς Βακτρίων ἰθαιγενὴς θαλασσόπληκτον νῆσον Αἴαντος πολεῖ.
Tenagon, the true-born Bactrians’ chieftain, is ranging now around the surf-beaten isle of Ajax.

124	Λίλαιος, Ἀρσάμης τε κἀργήστης τρίτος, οἵδ’ ἀμφὶ νῆσον τὴν πελειοθρέμμονα δινούμενοι ’κύρισσον ἰσχυρὰν χθόνα.
Lilaeus and Arsames, and, third, Argestes, kept buffeting against its rugged shore, whirled around about the island, the breeding-place of doves.

125	πηγαῖς τε Νείλου γειτονῶν Αἰγυπτίου Ἀρκτεύς, Ἀδεύης, καὶ φερεσσάκης τρίτος Φαρνοῦχος, οἵδε ναὸς ἐκ μιᾶς πέσον.
Arcteus, too, who lived by the waters of the Egyptian Nile, Adeues, and Pharnuchus of the mighty shield—all these were hurled out of one ship.

126	Χρυσεὺς Μάταλλος μυριόνταρχος θανών, ἵππου μελαίνης ἡγεμὼν τρισμυρίας, πυρρὰν ζαπληθῆ δάσκιον γενειάδα ἔτεγγ’, ἀμείβων χρῶτα πορφυρέᾳ βαφῇ.
Matallus of Chrysa, commander of ten thousand, leader of the Black Cavalry, thirty thousand strong, in death dyed red his thick and shaggy beard, changing its color with a deep crimson stain.

127	καὶ Μᾶγος Ἄραβος, Ἀρτάβης τε Βάκτριος, σκληρᾶς μέτοικος γῆς, ἐκεῖ κατέφθιτο.
Arabus, too, the Magian, perished there, and Bactrian Artabes, a settler now in a rugged land.

128	Ἄμιστρις Ἀμφιστρεύς τε πολύπονον δόρυ νωμῶν, ὅ τ’ ἐσθλὸς Ἀριόμαρδος Σάρδεσι πένθος παρασχών, Σεισάμης θ’ ὁ Μύσιος, Θάρυβίς τε πεντήκοντα πεντάκις νεῶν ταγός, γένος Λυρναῖος, εὐειδὴς ἀνήρ, κεῖται θανὼν δείλαιος οὐ μάλ’ εὐτυχῶς.
Amistris, and Amphistreus, wielder of a painful spear, and brave Ariomardus, whose death brought grief to Sardis, and Seisames the Mysian, and Tharybis, admiral of five times fifty ships, a Lyrnaean by descent, a man of physical beauty, lies dead in a state of misery, no longer attended by good fortune.

129	Συέννεσίς τε πρῶτος εἰς εὐψυχίαν, Κιλίκων ἄπαρχος, εἷς ἀνὴρ πλεῖστον πόνον ἐχθροῖς παρασχών εὐκλεῶς ἀπώλετο.
Syennesis, also, the governor of the Cilicians, foremost in courage, he whose prowess did the foe most harm, found there a glorious death.

130	τοσόνδε ταγῶν νῦν ὑπεμνήσθην πέρι.
Such were the leaders about whom I was making my report.

131	πολλῶν παρόντων δ’ ὀλίγ’ ἀπαγγέλλω κακά.
Although our losses were many, I announce but few.

132	αἰαῖ, κακῶν ὕψιστα δὴ κλύω τάδε, αἴσχη τε Πέρσαις καὶ λιγέα κωκύματα.
Alas! The words I hear put the very crown upon our woes; a disgrace to the Persians and cause for shrill lament.

133	ἀτὰρ φράσον μοι τοῦτ’ ἀναστρέψας πάλιν;
But retrace your tale and tell me this clearly:

134	πόσον δὲ πλῆθος ἦν νεῶν Ἑλληνίδων, ὥστ’ ἀξιῶσαι Περσικῷ στρατεύματι μάχην συνάψαι ναΐοισιν ἐμβολαῖς;
how great was the number of the Greek ships which gave them confidence enough to go into battle with their armed prows against the Persian army?

135	πλήθους μὲν ἂν σάφ’ ἴσθ’ ἕκατι βάρβαρον ναυσὶν κρατῆσαι.
Messenger: If numbers had been the only factor, be assured that the barbarians would have gained the victory with their fleet.

136	καὶ γὰρ Ἕλλησιν μὲν ἦν ὁ πᾶς ἀριθμὸς ἐς τριακάδας δέκα ναῶν, δεκὰς δ’ ἦν τῶνδε χωρὶς ἔκκριτος.
For the whole number of the ships of Hellas amounted to ten times thirty, and, in addition to these, there was a chosen squadron of ten.

137	Ξέρξῃ δέ, καὶ γὰρ οἶδα, χιλιὰς μὲν ἦν ὧν ἦγε πλῆθος, αἱ δ’ ὑπέρκοποι τάχει ἑκατὸν δὶς ἦσαν ἑπτά.
But Xerxes, this I know, had under his command a thousand, while those excelling in speed were twice a hundred, and seven more.

138	ὧδ’ ἔχει λόγος.
This is the total of their respective numbers.

139	μή σοι δοκοῦμεν τῇδε λειφθῆναι μάχῃ;
Do you think that we were simply outnumbered in this contest?

140	ἀλλ’ ὧδε δαίμων τις κατέφθειρε στρατόν, τάλαντα βρίσας οὐκ ἰσορρόπῳ τύχῃ.
No, it was some divine power that tipped the scale of fortune with unequal weight and thus destroyed our host.

141	θεοὶ πόλιν σῴζουσι Παλλάδος θεᾶς.
The gods preserve the city of the goddess Pallas.

142	ἔτ’ ἆρ’ Ἀθηνῶν ἔστ’ ἀπόρθητος πόλις;
Atossa: Is then the city of Athens not yet despoiled?

143	ἀνδρῶν γὰρ ὄντων ἕρκος ἐστὶν ἀσφαλές.
Messenger: No, while her men still live, her ramparts are impregnable.

144	ἀρχὴ δὲ ναυσὶ συμβολῆς τίς ἦν, φράσον;
Atossa: But the beginning of the encounter of the fleets, tell me about it.

145	τίνες κατῆρξαν, πότερον Ἕλληνες, μάχης, ἢ παῖς ἐμός, πλήθει καταυχήσας νεῶν;
Who began the onset? Was it the Hellenes? Or my son, exulting in the multitude of his ships?

146	ἦρξεν μέν, ὦ δέσποινα, τοῦ παντὸς κακοῦ φανεὶς ἀλάστωρ ἢ κακὸς δαίμων ποθέν.
Messenger: My Queen, some destructive power or evil spirit, appearing from somewhere or other, caused the beginning of our utter rout.

147	ἀνὴρ γὰρ Ἕλλην ἐξ Ἀθηναίων στρατοῦ ἐλθὼν ἔλεξε παιδ

ὶ σῷ Ξέρξῃ τάδε, ὡς εἰ μελαίνης νυκτὸς ἵξεται κνέφας, Ἕλληνες οὐ μενοῖεν, ἀλλὰ σέλμασιν ναῶν ἐπανθορόντες ἄλλος ἄλλοσε δρασμῷ κρυφαίῳ βίοτον ἐκσωσοίατο.
A Hellene, from the Athenian host, came to your son Xerxes and told this tale: that, when the gloom of black night should set in, the Hellenes would not remain in place, but, springing upon the rowing benches of their ships, would seek, some here, some there, to preserve their lives by stealthy flight.

148	ὁ δ’ εὐθὺς ὡς ἤκουσεν, οὐ ξυνεὶς δόλον Ἕλληνος ἀνδρὸς οὐδὲ τὸν θεῶν φθόνον, πᾶσιν προφωνεῖ τόνδε ναυάρχοις λόγον, εὖτ’ ἂν φλέγων ἀκτῖσιν ἥλιος χθόνα λήξῃ, κνέφας δὲ τέμενος αἰθέρος λάβῃ, τάξαι νεῶν στῖφος μὲν ἐν στοίχοις τρισὶν ἔκπλους φυλάσσειν καὶ πόρους ἁλιρρόθους, ἄλλας δὲ κύκλῳ νῆσον Αἴαντος πέριξ.
But Xerxes, when he heard this, comprehending neither the cleverness of the Greek nor that the gods grudged him success, straightway gave all his captains orders to this effect—that, when the sun had ceased to illumine the earth with his beams, and darkness had covered the region of the sky, they should bring up in a tight group the main body of the fleet, disposed in triple line, to bar the exits and the sounding straits, and station other ships in a circle around the island of Ajax.

149	ὡς εἰ μόρον φευξοίαθ’ Ἕλληνες κακόν, ναυσὶν κρυφαίως δρασμὸν εὑρόντες τινά, πᾶσιν στέρεσθαι κρατὸς ἦν προκείμενον.
He gave them a warning too that, should the Hellenes escape an evil doom, finding by stealth some means of flight for their fleet, it had been decreed that every captain should lose his head.

150	τοσαῦτ’ ἔλεξε κάρθ’ ὑπ’ εὐθύμου φρενός.
These commands he made with complete confidence of heart.

151	οὐ γὰρ τὸ μέλλον ἐκ θεῶν ἠπίστατο.
For he did not foresee the future that the gods had ordained.

152	οἱ δ’ οὐκ ἀκόσμως, ἀλλὰ πειθάρχῳ φρενὶ δεῖπνόν τ’ ἐπορσύνοντο, ναυβάτης τ’ ἀνὴρ τροποῦτο κώπην σκαλμὸν ἀμφ’ εὐήρετμον.
Our crews, with no lack of order but with an obedient spirit, prepared their evening meal, and each sailor looped his oar about its thole-pin so that it fitted well.

153	ἐπεὶ δὲ φέγγος ἡλίου κατέφθιτο καὶ νὺξ ἐπῄει, πᾶς ἀνὴρ κώπης ἄναξ ἐς ναῦν ἐχώρει πᾶς θ’ ὅπλων ἐπιστάτης.
But when the light of the sun had faded and night drew on, each master of an oar and each man versed in arms went on board.

154	τάξις δὲ τάξιν παρεκάλει νεὼς μακρᾶς.
The long galleys cheered each other, line by line.

155	πλέουσι δ’ ὡς ἕκαστος ἦν τεταγμένος, καὶ πάννυχοι δὴ διάπλοον καθίστασαν ναῶν ἄνακτες πάντα ναυτικὸν λεών.
And they held their course as each captain had been ordered, and all through the night the commanders of the fleet kept their whole force cruising to and fro across the strait.

156	καὶ νὺξ ἐχώρει, κ- οὐ μάλ’ Ἑλλήνων στρατὸς κρυφαῖον ἔκπλουν οὐδαμῇ καθίστατο.
Night began to wane, yet the fleet of the Hellenes in no way attempted to put forth by stealth.

157	ἐπεί γε μέντοι λευκόπωλος ἡμέρα πᾶσαν κατέσχε γαῖαν εὐφεγγὴς ἰδεῖν, πρῶτον μὲν ἠχῇ κέλαδος Ἑλλήνων πάρα μολπηδὸν ηὐφήμησεν, ὄρθιον δ’ ἅμα ἀντηλάλαξε νησιώτιδος πέτρας ἠχώ.
When, however, radiant Day with her white horses shone over all the land, a loud cheer like a song of triumph first rang out from the Hellenes, and, at the same instant, clear from the island crags, an echo returned an answering cry.

158	φόβος δὲ πᾶσι βαρβάροις παρῆν γνώμης ἀποσφαλεῖσιν.
Terror fell on all the barbarians, balked of their purpose;

159	οὐ γὰρ ὡς φυγῇ παιᾶν' ἐφύμνουν σεμνὸν Ἕλληνες τότε, ἀλλ' ἐς μάχην ὁρμῶντες εὐψύχῳ θράσει.
for then the Hellenes chanted their solemn paean, not as in flight, but as men rushing to the onset with the courage of gallant hearts.

160	σάλπιγξ δ’ ἀϋτῇ πάντ’ ἐκεῖν’ ἐπέφλεγεν .
The trumpet with its blast set all their side afire,
161	εὐθὺς δὲ κώπης ῥοθιάδος ξυνεμβολῇ ἔπαισαν ἅλμην βρύχιον ἐκ κελεύματος , θοῶς δὲ πάντες ἦσαν ἐκφανεῖς ἰδεῖν .
and instantly, at the word of command, with the even stroke of foaming oars they struck the briny deep. Swiftly they all came clear into view.
162	τὸ δεξιὸν μὲν πρῶτον εὐτάκτως κέρας ἡγεῖτο κόσμῳ , δεύτερον δ’ ὁ πᾶς στόλος ἐπεξεχώρει , καὶ παρῆν ὁμοῦ κλύειν πολλὴν βοήν , ὦ παῖδες Ἑλλήνων ἴτε , ἐλευθεροῦτε πατρίδ’ , ἐλευθεροῦτε δὲ παῖδας , γυναῖκας , θεῶν τέ πατρῴων ἕδη , θήκας τε προγόνων ·
Their right wing, well marshalled, led on in orderly advance, next their whole army pressed on against us, and at the same time a loud shout met our ears: On, you men of Hellas! Free your native land. Free your children, your wives, the temples of your fathers’ gods, and the tombs of your ancestors.
163	νῦν ὑπὲρ πάντων ἀγών .
Now you are fighting for all you have.
164	καὶ μὴν παρ’ ἡμῶν Περσίδος γλώσσης ῥόθος ὑπηντίαζε , κ- οὐκέτʼ ἦν μέλλειν ἀκμή .
Then from our side arose in response the mingled clamor of Persian speech, and straightaway the ships dashed together their bronze prows.
165	εὐθὺς δὲ ναῦς ἐν νηὶ χαλκήρη στόλον ἔπαισεν ·
It was a ship of Hellas that began the charge and chopped off in its entirety the curved stern of a Phoenician boat.
166	ἦρξε δ’ ἐμβολῆς Ἑλληνικὴ ναῦς , κ- ἀποθραύει πάντα Φοινίσσης νεὼς κόρυμβ’ , ἐπ’ ἄλλην δ’ ἄλλος ηὔθυνεν δόρυ .
Each captain drove his ship straight against some other ship.
167	τὰ πρῶτα μέν νυν ῥεῦμα Περσικοῦ στρατοῦ ἀντεῖχεν ·
At first the stream of the Persian army held its own.
168	ὡς δὲ πλῆθος ἐν στενῷ νεῶν ἤθροιστ’ ἀρωγὴ δ’ οὔτις ἀλλήλοις παρῆν , αὐτοὶ δ’ ὑφ’ αὑτῶν ἐμβόλοις χαλκοστόμοις παίοντ’ , ἔθραυον πάντα κωπήρη στόλον , Ἑλληνικαί τε νῆες οὐκ ἀφρασμόνως κύκλῳ πέριξ ἔθεινον , ὑπτιοῦτο δὲ σκάφη νεῶν , θάλασσα δ’ οὐκέτ’ ἦν ἰδεῖν , ναυαγίων πλήθουσα καὶ φόνου βροτῶν .
When, however, the mass of our ships had been crowded in the narrows, and none could render another aid, and each crashed its bronze prow against each of its own line, they splintered their whole bank of oars. Then the Hellenic galleys, not heedless of their chance, hemmed them in and battered them on every side. The hulls of our vessels rolled over, and the sea was hidden from our sight, strewn as it was with wrecks and slaughtered men.
169	ἀκταὶ δὲ νεκρῶν χοιράδες τ’ ἐπλήθυον , φυγῇ δ’ ἀκόσμῳ πᾶσα ναῦς ἠρέσσετο , ὅσαιπερ ἦσαν βαρβάρου στρατεύματος .
The shores and reefs were crowded with our dead, and every ship that formed a part of the barbarian fleet plied its oars in disorderly flight.

170	τοὶ δ’ ὥστε θύννους ἤ τιν’ ἰχθύων βόλον ἀγαῖσι κωπῶν θραύμασίν τ’ ἐρειπίων ἔπαιον , ἐρράχιζον ·
But, as if our men were tuna or some haul of fish, the foe kept striking and hacking them with broken oars and fragments of wrecked ships.

171	οἰμωγὴ δ’ ὁμοῦ κωκύμασιν κατεῖχε πελαγίαν ἅλα , ἕως κελαινῆς νυκτὸς ὄμμ’ ἀφείλετο .
Groans and shrieks together filled the open sea until the face of black night hid the scene.

172	κακῶν δὲ πλῆθος , οὐδ’ ἂν εἰ δέκ’ ἤματα στοιχηγοροίην , οὐκ ἂν ἐκπλήσαιμί σοι .
But as for the the full extent of our disasters, this, even if I had ten days in succession to do so, I could not describe to you.

173	εὖ γὰρ τόδ’ ἴσθι , μηδάμ’ ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ πλῆθος τοσουτάριθμον ἀνθρώπων θανεῖν .
However, you can be sure that so great a multitude of men never perished in a single day.

174	αἰαῖ , κακῶν δὴ πέλαγος ἔρρωγεν μέγα Πέρσαις τε καὶ πρόπαντι βαρβάρων γένει .
Alas! In truth a vast sea of troubles has burst upon the Persians and the entire barbarian race.

175	εὖ νυν τόδ’ ἴσθι , μηδέπω μεσοῦν κακόν ·
Be assured of this, not even half of the disaster has as yet been told.

176	τοιάδ’ ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς ἦλθε συμφορὰ πάθους ὡς τοῖσδε καὶ δὶς ἀντισηκῶσαι ῥοπῇ .
A calamity so dreadful as to outweigh these ills twice over befell them.

177	καὶ τίς γένοιτ’ ἂν τῆσδ’

177	καὶ τίς γένοιτ’ ἂν τῆσδ’ ἔτ’ ἐχθίων τύχη ;
But what greater misfortune than this could have befallen them?

178	λέξον τίν’ αὖ φὴς τήνδε συμφορὰν στρατῷ ἐλθεῖν κακῶν ῥέπουσαν ἐς τὰ μάσσονα .
Speak! What is this other disaster you say came upon our force, sinking the scale to greater weight of ill?

179	Περσῶν ὅσοιπερ ἦσαν ἀκμαῖοι φύσιν , ψυχήν τ’ ἄριστοι κ- εὐγένειαν ἐκπρεπεῖς , αὐτῷ τ’ ἄνακτι πίστιν ἐν πρώτοις ἀεί , τεθνᾶσιν αἰσχρῶς δυσκλεεστάτῳ μόρῳ .
Those Persians who were in their life’s prime, bravest in spirit, pre-eminent for noble birth, and always among the foremost in loyalty to the King himself— these have fallen ignobly by a most inglorious doom.

180	οἲ ’γὼ τάλαινα συμφορᾶς κακῆς , φίλοι .
Ah, I am truly reduced to misery through this disaster!

181	ποίῳ μόρῳ δὲ τούσδε φὴς ὀλωλέναι ;
By what fate was it that you say they met their end?

182	νῆσός τις ἔστι πρόσθε Σαλαμῖνος τόπων , βαιά , δύσορμος ναυσίν , ἣν ὁ φιλόχορος Πὰν ἐμβατεύει , ποντίας ἀκτῆς ἔπι .
There is an island lying before Salamis, a small one and dangerous anchorage for ships; its sea-washed shore is the haunt of Pan, who loves the dance.

183	ἐνταῦθα πέμπει τούσδ’ , ὅπως , ὅταν νεῶν φθαρέντες ἐχθροὶ νῆσον ἐκσῳζοίατο , κτείνοιεν εὐχείρωτον Ἑλλήνων στρατόν , φίλους δ’ ὑπεκσῴζοιεν ἐναλίων πόρων , κακῶς τὸ μέλλον ἱστορῶν .
There Xerxes dispatched these, his choicest troops, in order that when the Hellenic enemy, wrecked from their ships, should flee in search of safety to the island, they might slaughter their force, an easy prey, and rescue their comrades from the straits of the sea. Grievously did he misjudge the issue.

184	ὡς γὰρ θεὸς ναῶν ἔδωκε κῦδος Ἕλλησιν μάχης , αὐθημερὸν φράξαντες εὐχάλκοις δέμας ὅπλοισι ναῶν ἐξέθρῳσκον ·
For when some god had given the glory to the Hellenes in the battle on the sea, on that same day, fencing their bodies in armor of bronze, they leapt from their ships and encircled the whole island, so that our men were at a loss which way to turn.

185	ἀμφὶ δὲ κυκλοῦντο πᾶσαν νῆσον , ὥστ’ ἀμηχανεῖν ὅποι τράποιντο .
Often they were struck by stones slung from their hands,

186	πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ χερῶν πέτροισιν ἠράσσοντο , τοξικῆς τ’ ἄπο θώμιγγος ἰοὶ προσπίτνοντές ὤλλυσαν ·
and arrows sped from the bow-string kept falling upon them and doing them harm.

187	τέλος δ’ ἐφορμηθέντες ἐξ ἑνὸς ῥόθου παίουσι , κρεοκοποῦσι δυστήνων μέλη , ἕως ἁπάντων ἐξαπέφθειραν βίον .
At last the Hellenes, charging with one shout, struck them and hacked to pieces the limbs of the poor wretches, until they had utterly quenched the life of all.

188	Ξέρξης δ’ ἀνῴμωξεν κακῶν ὁρῶν βάθος ·
Xerxes groaned aloud when he beheld the extent of the disaster,

189	ἕδραν γὰρ εἶχε παντὸς εὐαγῆ στρατοῦ , ὑψηλὸν ὄχθον ἄγχι πελαγίας ἁλός ·
for he occupied a seat commanding a clear view of the entire army—a lofty headland by the open sea.

190	ῥήξας δὲ πέπλους κ- ἀνακωκύσας λιγύ , πεζῷ παραγγείλας ἄφαρ στρατεύματι , ἵησ’ ἀκόσμῳ ξὺν φυγῇ .
Tearing his robes and uttering a loud cry, he straightaway gave orders to his force on land and dismissed them in disorderly flight.

191	τοιάνδε σοι πρὸς τῇ πάροιθε συμφορὰν πάρα στένειν .
This, besides the one already told, is the disaster you must bewail.

192	ὦ στυγνὲ δαῖμον , ὡς ἄρ’ ἔψευσας φρενῶν Πέρσας ·
O hateful divinity, how have you foiled the purpose of the Persians!

193	πικρὰν δὲ παῖς ἐμὸς τιμωρίαν κλεινῶν Ἀθηνῶν ηὗρε , κ- οὐκ ἀπήρκεσαν οὓς πρόσθε Μαραθὼν βαρβάρων ἀπώλεσεν ·
Cruel was the vengeance which my son brought upon himself for his designs against illustrious Athens; the barbarians whom Marathon destroyed were not enough.

194	ὧν ἀντίποινα παῖς ἐμὸς πράξειν δοκῶν τοσόνδε πλῆ

θος πημάτων ἐπέσπασεν .
It was in an effort to exact retribution for them that my son has drawn upon himself so great a multitude of woes.

195	σὺ δ’ εἰπέ , ναῶν αἳ πεφεύγασιν μόρον , ποῦ τάσδ’ ἔλειπες ·
But the ships that escaped destruction—tell me about them. Where did you leave them?

196	οἶσθα σημῆναι τορῶς ;
Can you give a clear report?

197	ναῶν γε ταγοὶ τῶν λελειμμένων σύδην κατ’ οὖρον οὐκ εὔκοσμον αἴρονται φυγήν ·
The commanders of the ships which still remained fled with a rush in disorder wherever the wind bore them.

198	στρατὸς δ’ ὁ λοιπὸς ἔν τε Βοιωτῶν χθονὶ διώλλυθ’ , οἱ μὲν ἀμφὶ κρηναῖον γάνος δίψῃ πονοῦντες , οἱ δ’ ὑπ’ ἄσθματος κενοὶ διεκπερῶμεν ἔς τε Φωκέων χθόνα καὶ Δωρίδ’ αἶαν , Μηλιᾶ τε κόλπον , οὗ Σπερχειὸς ἄρδει πεδίον εὐμενεῖ ποτῷ ·
As for the survivors of the army, they perished in Boeotian territory, some, faint from thirst, beside a refreshing spring,

while some of us, exhausted and panting, made our way to the land of the Phocians, to Doris and the Melian gulf, where the Spercheus waters the plain with kindly stream.

199	κ- ἐντεῦθεν ἡμᾶς γῆς Ἀχαιίδος πέδον καὶ Θεσσαλῶν πόλεις ὑπεσπανισμένους βορᾶς ἐδέξαντ’ ·
Coming from there, badly in need of food, we received welcome in the Achaean land and the cities of the Thessalians.

200	ἔνθα δὴ πλεῖστοι ’θάνον δίψῃ τε λιμῷ τ’ ·
There it was that many perished of thirst and hunger, for we were oppressed by both.

201	ἀμφότερα γὰρ ἦν τάδε .
For both these afflictions were present.

202	Μαγνητικὴν δὲ γαῖαν ἔς τε Μακεδόνων χώραν ἀφικόμεσθ’ , ἐπ’ Ἀξίου πόρον , Βόλβης θ’ ἕλειον δόνακα , Πάγγαιόν τ’ ὄρος , Ἠδωνίδ’ αἶαν ·
And we came to the Magnesian land and to the country of the Macedonians, to the ford of the Axius and Bolbe’s reedy marsh, and to Mount Pangaeus, in the Edonian land.

203	νυκτὶ δ’ ἐν ταύτῃ θεὸς χειμῶν’ ἄωρον ὦρσε , πήγνυσιν δὲ πᾶν ῥέεθρον ἁγνοῦ Στρυμόνος .
But on that night the god roused winter before its time and froze the stream of sacred Strymon from shore to shore.

204	θεοὺς δέ τις τὸ πρὶν νομίζων οὐδαμοῦ τότ’ ηὔχετο λιταῖσι , γαῖαν οὐρανόν τε προσκυνῶν .
Many a man who before that had held the gods in no esteem, implored them then in supplication, doing obeisance to earth and heaven.

205	ἐπεὶ δὲ πολλὰ θεοκλυτῶν ἐπαύσατο στρατός , περᾷ κρυσταλλοπῆγα διὰ πόρον ·
But when our host had made an end of its fervent invocation of the gods, it ventured to pass across the ice-bound stream. 

206	κ- ὅστις μὲν ἡμῶν πρὶν σκεδασθῆναι θεοῦ ἀκτῖνας ὡρμήθη , σεσωσμένος κυρεῖ .
And each of us who started on his way before the sun god dispersed his beams, found himself in safety, 

207	φλέγων γὰρ αὐγαῖς λαμπρὸς ἡλίου κύκλος μέσον πόρον διῆκε , θερμαίνων φλογί .
for the bright orb of the sun with its burning rays heated the middle section and pierced it with its flames. 

208	πῖπτον δ’ ἐπ’ ἀλλήλοισιν ·
One after another our men sank in, 

209	ηὐτύχει δέ τοι ὅστις τάχιστα πνεῦμ’ ἀπέρρηξεν βίου .
and fortunate indeed was he who perished soonest. 

210	ὅσοι δὲ λοιποὶ κ- ἔτυχον σωτηρίας , Θρῄκην περάσαντες μόγις πολλῷ πόνῳ , ἥκουσιν ἐκφυγόντες , οὐ πολλοί τινες , ἐφ’ ἑστιοῦχον γαῖαν ·
The survivors, after making their way through Thrace with great hardship, —and few they were indeed—escaped to the safety of the land of their homes; 

211	ὡς στένειν πόλιν Περσῶν , ποθοῦσαν φιλτάτην ἥβην χθονός .
now the city of the Persians may make lament in regret for the beloved youth of the land. 

212	ταῦτ’ ἔστ’ ἀληθῆ ·
What I say is true, 

213	πολλὰ δ’ ἐκλείπω λέγων κακῶν ἃ Πέρσαις ἐγκατέσκηψεν θεός .
yet much remains untold of the ills launched by Heaven upon the Persians. 

214	ὦ δυσπόνητε δαῖμον , ὡς ἄ

γαν βαρὺς ποδοῖν ἐνήλου παντὶ Περσικῷ γένει .
O unearthly power, source of our cruel distress, with what crushing weight have you fallen upon the whole Persian race! 

215	οἲ ’γὼ τάλαινα διαπεπραγμένου στρατοῦ ·
How the utter destruction of our host distresses me! 

216	ὦ νυκτὸς ὄψις ἐμφανὴς ἐνυπνίων , ὡς κάρτα μοι σαφῶς ἐδήλωσας κακά .
O vivid vision of my dreams at night, how clearly did you signify misfortune to me!

217	ὑμεῖς δὲ φαύλως αὔτ’ ἄγαν ἐκρίνατε .
And all too lightly did you in turn interpret it. 

218	ὅμως δ’ , ἐπειδὴ τῇδ’ ἐκύρωσεν φάτις ὑμῶν , θεοῖς μὲν πρῶτον εὔξασθαι θέλω ·
However, since your explanation determined thus, first of all I wish to offer prayers to the gods, 

219	ἔπειτα Γῇ τε καὶ φθιτοῖς δωρήματα ἥξω λαβοῦσα πέλανον ἐξ οἴκων ἐμῶν , — ἐπίσταμαι μὲν ὡς

 ἐπ’ ἐξειργασμένοις , ἀλλ’ ἐς τὸ λοιπὸν εἴ τι δὴ λῷον πέλοι .
and then I will return after I have brought from the palace a sacrificial cake as a gift to Earth and the dead. I know indeed that it is for what cannot be undone, yet I do this in the hope that something more auspicious may come to pass in the future. 

220	ὑμᾶς δὲ χρὴ ’πὶ τοῖσδε τοῖς πεπραγμένοις πιστοῖσι πιστὰ ξυμφέρειν βουλεύματα ·
But you should confer faithfully with the faithful counsellors in view of what has befallen. 

221	καὶ παῖδ’ , ἐάν περ δεῦρ’ ἐμοῦ πρόσθεν μόλῃ , παρηγορεῖτε , καὶ προπέμπετ’ ἐς δόμους , μὴ καί τι πρὸς κακοῖσι προσθῆται κακόν .
And if my son should come here before I return, comfort him and escort him to the palace, lest he add some further ill to those already ours.

222	ὦ Ζεῦ βασιλεῦ , νῦν γὰρ Περσῶν τῶν μεγαλαύχων καὶ πολυάνδρων στρατιὰν ὀλέσας ἄστυ τὸ Σούσων ἠδ’ Ἀγβατάνων πένθει δνοφερῷ κατέκρυψας ·
O sovereign Zeus, by destroying the army of the haughty and multitudinous Persians, you have shrouded in the gloom of grief the city of Susa and of Agbatana!

223	πολλαὶ δ’ ἀταλαῖς χερσὶ καλύπτρας κατερεικόμεναι διαμυδαλέοις δάκρυσι κόλπους τέγγουσ’ , ἄλγους μετέχουσαι .
Many a woman, who has a share in this sorrow, tears her veil with tender hands and moistens with drenching tears the robe covering her bosom.

224	αἱ δ’ ἁβρόγοοι Περσίδες ἀνδρῶν ποθέουσαι ἰδεῖν ἀρτιζυγίαν , λέκτρων εὐνὰς ἁβροχίτωνας , χλιδανῆς ἥβης τέρψιν , ἀφεῖσαι , πενθοῦσι γόοις ἀκορεστοτάτοις .
And the Persian wives, longing to behold their husbands in their prime, having abandoned the daintily wrought coverlets of their couches, the delight of their youth, mourn with complainings that know no end.

225	κ- ἐγὼ δὲ μόρον τῶν οἰχομένων αἴρω δοκίμως πολυπενθῆ .
So I too sustain the truly woeful fate of those who are gone.

226	νῦν γὰρ δὴ πρόπασα μὲν στένει γαῖ’ Ἀσιὰς ἐκκενουμένα .
For now in truth the whole land of Asia, decimated, moans:

227	Ξέρξης μὲν ἄγαγεν , ποποῖ , Ξέρξης δ’ ἀπώλεσεν , τοτοῖ , Ξέρξης δὲ πάντ’ ἐπέσπε δυσφρόνως βαρίδεσσι ποντίαις .
Xerxes led forth (woe!), Xerxes laid low (woe!), Xerxes disposed all things imprudently with his sea-going vessels.

228	τίπτε Δαρεῖος μὲν οὕτω τότ’ ἀβλαβὴς ἐπῆν τόξαρχος πολιήταις , Σουσίδαις φίλος ἄκτωρ ;
Why then was Darius in his time so unscathed by disaster, he who was ruler of archers, to the men of Susa a beloved leader?

229	πεζούς τε γὰρ καὶ θαλασσίους λινόπτεροι κυανώπιδες νᾶες μὲν ἄγαγον , ποποῖ , νᾶες δ’ ἀπώλεσαν , τοτοῖ , νᾶες πανωλέθροισιν ἐμβολαῖς , αἵ τ’ Ἰαόνων χέρες .
For infantry and seamen both, the ships, dark-eyed and linen-winged, led forth (woe!), the ships laid them low (woe!), the ships, under the deadly impact of the foe and by the hands of Ionians.

230	τυτθὰ δ’ ἐκφυγεῖν ἄνακτ’ αὐτὸν εἰσακούομεν Θρῄκης ἂμ πεδιήρεις δυσχίμους τε κελεύθους .
The King himself, as we learn, has barely made his escape over the wintry paths which traverse the plains of Thrace.

231	τοὶ δ’ ἄρα πρωτόμοιροι , φεῦ , λειφθέντες πρὸς ἀνάγκας , ἠέ , ἀκτὰς ἀμφὶ Κυχρείας , ὀᾶ , σύρονται ·
And they who were first to meet their doom (alas!), left behind by dire necessity (alas!), are swept along the Cychrean strand (woe!).

232	στένε καὶ δακνάζου , βαρὺ δ’ ἀμβόασον οὐράνι’ ἄχη , ὀᾶ ·
Groan and gnash your teeth; in grievous strain shout forth our woes till they reach the heavens (alas!), raise high your wailing clamor in cries of misery.

233	τεῖνε δὲ δυσβάυκτον βοᾶτιν τάλαιναν αὐδάν .
Raise high your wailing clamor in cries of misery.

234	γναπτόμενοι δὲ δίνᾳ , φεῦ , σκ

234	γναπτόμενοι δὲ δίνᾳ , φεῦ , σκύλλονται πρὸς ἀναύδων , ἠέ , παίδων τᾶς ἀμιάντου , ὀᾶ .
Lacerated by the swirling waters (alas!) they are gnawed (alas!) by the voiceless children of the undefiled sea (alas!).

235	πενθεῖ δ’ ἄνδρα δόμος στερηθείς τοκέες τ’ ἄπαιδες δαιμόνι’ ἄχη , ὀᾶ , δυρόμενοι γέροντες τὸ πᾶν δὴ κλύουσιν ἄλγος .
The home, bereaved of his presence, laments its head; and parents, bereft of their children, in their old age bewail their heaven-sent woes (alas!), now that they learn the full measure of their afflictions.

236	τοὶ δ’ ἀνὰ γᾶν Ἀσίαν δὴν οὐκέτι περσονομοῦνται , οὐδ’ ἔτι δασμοφοροῦσιν δεσποσύνοισιν ἀνάγκαις , οὐδ’ ἐς γᾶν προπίτνοντες ἅζονται ·
Not now for long will those who dwell throughout the length and breadth of Asia abide under the sway of the Persians, nor will they pay further tribute at the compulsion of their lord, nor will they prostrate themselves to the earth and do him reverence;

237	βασιλεία γὰρ διόλωλεν ἰσχύς .
for the royal power has perished utterly.

238	οὐδ’ ἔτι γλῶσσα βροτοῖσιν ἐν φυλακαῖς ·
No longer will men keep a curb upon their tongues;

239	λέλυται γὰρ λαὸς ἐλεύθερα βάζειν , ὡς ἐλύθη ζυγὸν ἀλκᾶς .
for the people are set free to utter their thoughts at will, now that the yoke of power has been broken.

240	αἱμαχθεῖσα δ’ ἄρουραν Αἴαντος περικλύστα νᾶσος ἔχει τὰ Περσᾶν .
The blood-stained soil of Ajax’ sea-washed isle holds all that once was Persia.

241	φίλοι , κακῶν μὲν ὅστις ἔμπειρος κυρεῖ , ἐπίσταται βροτοῖσιν ὡς ὅταν κλύδων κακῶν ἐπέλθῃ πάντα δειμαίνειν φιλεῖ ·
My friends, whoever has experience of misery knows that when a sea of troubles comes upon mortal men, they view all things with alarm;

242	ὅταν δ’ ὁ δαίμων εὐροῇ , πεποιθέναι τὸν αὐτὸν αἰεὶ δαίμον’ οὐριεῖν τύχην .
but when fortune flows with prosperous tide, they believe that this same fortune will forever bring them success.

243	ἐμοὶ γὰρ ἤδη πάντα μὲν φόβου πλέα ἐν ὄμμασιν τ- ἀνταῖα φαίνεται θεῶν , βοᾷ δ’ ἐν ὠσὶ κέλαδος οὐ παιώνιος ·
Now in my case everything seems full of dread; before my eyes appears the enmity of the gods, and in my ears there rings a sound that has no note of joy;

244	τοία κακῶν ἔκπληξις ἐκφοβεῖ φρένας .
such is my consternation at the evil tidings which terrify my soul.

245	τοιγὰρ κέλευθον τήνδ’ ἄνευ τ’ ὀχημάτων χλιδῆς τε τῆς πάροιθεν ἐκ δόμων πάλιν ἔστειλα , παιδὸς πατρὶ πρευμενεῖς χοὰς φέρουσ’ , ἅπερ νεκροῖσι μειλικτήρια , βοός τ’ ἀφ’ ἁγνῆς λευκὸν εὔποτον

245	τοιγὰρ κέλευθον τήνδ’ ἄνευ τ’ ὀχημάτων χλιδῆς τε τῆς πάροιθεν ἐκ δόμων πάλιν ἔστειλα , παιδὸς πατρὶ πρευμενεῖς χοὰς φέρουσ’ , ἅπερ νεκροῖσι μειλικτήρια , βοός τ’ ἀφ’ ἁγνῆς λευκὸν εὔποτον γάλα , τῆς τ’ ἀνθεμουργοῦ στάγμα , παμφαὲς μέλι , λιβάσιν ὑδρηλαῖς παρθένου πηγῆς μέτα , ἀκήρατόν τε μητρὸς ἀγρίας ἄπο ποτὸν παλαιᾶς ἀμπέλου γάνος τόδε ·
It is for this reason that I have come here from the palace once again, without my chariot and my former pomp, and bring, as propitiatory libations for the father of my son, offerings that soothe the dead, both white milk, pleasant to drink, from an unblemished cow, and bright honey, distillation wrought from blossoms by the bee, together with lustral water from a virgin spring; and from a rustic source, this unmixed draught, the quickening juice of an ancient vine.

246	τῆς τ’ αἰὲν ἐν φύλλοισι θαλλούσης βίον ξανθῆς ἐλαίας καρπὸς εὐώδης πάρα , ἄνθη τε πλεκτά , παμφόρου γαίας τέκνα , ἀλλ’ , ὦ φίλοι , χοαῖσι ταῖσδε νερτέρων ὕμνους ἐπευφημεῖτε , τόν τε δαίμονα Δαρεῖον ἀνακαλεῖσθε , γ

246	τῆς τ’ αἰὲν ἐν φύλλοισι θαλλούσης βίον ξανθῆς ἐλαίας καρπὸς εὐώδης πάρα , ἄνθη τε πλεκτά , παμφόρου γαίας τέκνα , ἀλλ’ , ὦ φίλοι , χοαῖσι ταῖσδε νερτέρων ὕμνους ἐπευφημεῖτε , τόν τε δαίμονα Δαρεῖον ἀνακαλεῖσθε , γαπότους δ’ ἐγὼ τιμὰς προπέμψω τάσδε νερτέροις θεοῖς .
Here too is the fragrant fruit of the pale-green olive that lives the entirety of its life in luxuriant foliage; and garlanded flowers, produce of the bounteous earth. But come, my friends, chant solemn songs as I make these libations to the dead, and summon forth the divine spirit of Darius, while I convey, in honor of the gods, these offerings for the earth to drink.

247	βασίλεια γύναι , πρέσβος Πέρσαις , σύ τε πέμπε χοὰς θαλάμους ὑπὸ γῆς , ἡμεῖς θ’ ὕμνοις αἰτησόμεθα φθιμένων πομποὺς εὔφρονας εἶναι κατὰ γαίας .
Royal lady, august queen of the Persians, pour these libations down to the chambers of the earth, while we, in solemn chant, beseech the guides of the dead beneath the earth to be gracious to our prayers.

248	ἀλλά , χθόνιοι δαίμονες ἁγνοί , Γῆ τε καὶ Ἑρμῆ , βασιλεῦ τ’ ἐνέρων , πέμψατ’ ἔνερθεν ψυχὴν ἐς φῶς ·
O holy divinities of the nether world, Earth and Hermes, and you, Lord of the dead, send up to the light the spirit from below;

249	εἰ γάρ τι κακῶν ἄκος οἶδε πλέον , μόνος ἂν θνητῶν πέρας εἴποι .
for if, beyond our prayers, he knows any further remedy for our distress, he alone of mortals can declare how to bring it to accomplishment.

250	ἦ ῥ’ ἀίει μου μακαρίτας ἰσοδαίμων βασιλεὺς βάρβαρ’ ἀσαφηνῆ ἱέντος τὰ παναίολ’ αἰανῆ δύσθροα βάγματ’ , ἢ παντάλαν’ ἄχη διαβοάσω ;
Does our sainted and godlike king hear me as I utter, in obscure barbaric speech, my dismal and dolorous cries? Or must I shout aloud the utter misery of my anguish so that it pierces the earth?

251	νέρθεν ἆρα κλύει μου ;
Does he hear me from below?

252	ἀλλὰ σύ μοι Γᾶ τε καὶ ἄλλοι χθονίων ἁγεμόνες δαίμονα μεγαυχῆ ἰόντ’ αἰνέσατ’ ἐκ δόμων , Περσᾶν Σουσιγενῆ θεόν ·
O Earth, and you other rulers of those who dwell in the nether world, ensure, I implore, that the glorious spirit, the god of the Persians, whom Susa bore, may quit his abode.

253	πέμπετε δ’ ἄνω οἷον οὔπω Περσὶς αἶ’ ἐκάλυψεν .
Send to the upper world him the likes of whom the Persian earth has never entombed.

254	ἦ φίλος ἁνήρ , φίλος ὄχθος ·
Beloved indeed was the hero, beloved is his burial mound;

255	φίλα γὰρ κέκευθεν ἤθη .
beloved are the qualities that lie buried there.

256	Ἀιδωνεὺς δ’ ἀναπομπὸς ἀνείης , Ἀιδωνεύς , θεῖον ἀνάκτορα Δαριᾶνα .
O Aidoneus, Aidoneus, who convey shades to the upper air, permit our divine lord Darius to come forth!

257	ἠέ .
Alas!

258	οὐδὲ γὰρ ἄνδρας ποτ’ ἀπώλλυ πολεμοφθόροισιν ἄταις , θεομήστωρ δ’ ἐκικλήσκετο Π

258	οὐδὲ γὰρ ἄνδρας ποτ’ ἀπώλλυ πολεμοφθόροισιν ἄταις , θεομήστωρ δ’ ἐκικλήσκετο Πέρσαις , θεομήστωρ δ’ ἔσκεν ,ἐπεὶ στρατὸν εὖ ποδούχει .
For since he did not ever cause the destruction of his people by senseless and ruinous wars, he bore the name of divine counsellor to the Persians; and a divine counsellor he was, since he guided his people well.

259	ἠέ .
Alas!

260	βαλήν , ἀρχαῖος βαλήν , ἴθι , ἱκοῦ ·
King, our king of old, come forth, draw near!

261	ἔλθ’ ἐπ’ ἄκρον κόρυμβον ὄχθου , κροκόβαπτον ποδὸς εὔμαριν ἀείρων , βασιλείου τιάρας φάλαρον πιφαύσκων .
Rise to the barrow’s topmost point, lift your saffron-dyed sandal, display the crest of your royal tiara!

262	βάσκε πάτερ ἄκακε Δαριάν , οἶ .
Come forth, O blameless father Darius.

263	ὅπως αἰανῆ κλύῃς νέα τ’ ἄχη , δέσποτα δεσπότου φάνηθι .
That you may hear pitiable and unheard-of sorrows, O Lord of our lord, appear!

264	Στυγία γάρ τις ἐπ’ ἀχλὺς πεπόταται ·
For a gloom, like that of Styx, hovers over us,

265	νεολαία γὰρ ἤδη κατὰ πᾶσ’ ὄλωλεν .
since all the youth of the land is now utterly destroyed.

266	βάσκε πάτερ ἄκακε Δαριάν , οἶ .
Come forth, O blameless father Darius!

267	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ ·
Alas, alas!

268	ὦ πολύκλαυτε φίλοισι θανών , τί τάδε δυνάτα δυνάτα περὶ τᾷ σᾷ δίδυμα διαγόεν ἁμάρτια ;
You whose death your friends bewailed with bitter tears, why, my king

268	ὦ πολύκλαυτε φίλοισι θανών , τί τάδε δυνάτα δυνάτα περὶ τᾷ σᾷ δίδυμα διαγόεν ἁμάρτια ;
You whose death your friends bewailed with bitter tears, why, my king, my king, why is it that our land has lost all its three-tiered galleys,

269	πᾶσαι γᾷ τᾷδ’ ἐξέφθινται τρίσκαλμοι νᾶες ἄναες ἄναες .
ships that are no more, no more?

270	ὦ πιστὰ πιστῶν ἥλικές θ’ ἥβης ἐμῆς Πέρσαι γεραιοί , τίνα πόλις πονεῖ πόνον ;
O most faithful of the faithful, comrades of my youth, aged Persians, what is it that is troubling the state?

271	στένει , κέκοπται , καὶ χαράσσεται πέδον .
The earth groans and is furrowed by the stamp of men.

272	λεύσσων δ’ ἄκοιτιν τὴν ἐμὴν τάφου πέλας ταρβῶ , χοὰς δὲ πρευμενὴς ἐδεξάμην .
As I behold my wife by my tomb, I feel alarm, and I accept her libations in kindly mood;

273	ὑμεῖς δὲ θρηνεῖτ’ ἐγγὺς ἑστῶτες τάφου καὶ ψυχαγωγοῖς ὀρθιάζοντες γόοις οἰκτρῶς καλεῖσθέ μ’ ·
while you, standing near my tomb, make lament, and with shrill cries that summon the spirits of the dead, invoke me piteously.

278	σέβομαι μὲν προσιδέσθαι , σέβομαι δ’ ἀντία λέξαι σέθεν ἀρχαίῳ περὶ τάρβει .
I shrink in awe from gazing upon you. I shrink in awe from speaking in your presence by reason of my former dread of you.




279	ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ κάτωθεν ἦλθον σοῖς γόοις πεπεισμένος , μή τι μακιστῆρα μῦθον , ἀλλὰ σύντομον λέγων εἰπὲ καὶ πέραινε πάντα , τὴν ἐμὴν αἰδῶ μεθείς .
Since, in compliance with your moanings, I have come from the world below, lay aside your awe of me; make your tale not long, but brief; speak out and deliver your story in its entirety.

280	δίεμαι μὲν χαρίσασθαι , δίεμαι δ’ ἀντία φάσθαι , λέξας δύσλεκτα φίλοισιν .
I fear to do your bidding; I fear to speak in your presence and deliver to those I love news hard to utter.

281	ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ δέος παλαιὸν σοὶ φρενῶν ἀνθίσταται , τῶν ἐμῶν λέκτρων γεραιὰ ξύννομ’ εὐγενὲς γύναι , κλαυμάτων λήξασα τῶνδε καὶ γόων σαφές τί μοι λέξον ·
Since dread long ingrained in your mind restrains you, cease, noble woman, venerable partner of my bed, from your tears and laments, speak to me with all frankness.

282	ἀνθρώπεια δ’ ἄν τοι πήματ’ ἂν τύχοι βροτοῖς .
Afflictions ordained for human life must, we know, befall mankind.

283	πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θαλάσσης , πολλ

283	πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θαλάσσης , πολλὰ δ’ ἐκ χέρσου κακὰ γίγνεται θνητοῖς , ὁ μάσσων βίοτος ἢν ταθῇ , πρόσω .
For many calamities from the sea, many from the land, arise to mortal men if their span of life is extended far.

284	ὦ βροτῶν πάντων ὑπερσχὼν ὄλβον εὐτυχεῖ πότμῳ ὡς ἕως τ’ ἔλευσσες αὐγὰς ἡλίου ζηλωτὸς ὢν βίοτον εὐαίωνα Πέρσαις ὡς θεὸς διήγαγες , νῦν τέ σε ζηλῶ θανόντα , πρὶν κακῶν ἰδεῖν βάθος .
O you who in prosperity surpassed all mortal men by your happy destiny, since, so long as you gazed upon the beams of the sun, you lived a life of felicity, envied of all, in Persian eyes a god, so now too I consider you fortunate in that you died before you beheld the depth of our calamities.

285	πάντα γάρ , Δαρεῖ’ ἀκούσῃ μῦθον ἐν βραχεῖ χρόνῳ .
The whole tale, O Darius, you will hear in brief space of time: the power of Persia is ruined almost utterly.

286	διαπεπόρθηται τὰ Περσῶν πράγμαθ’ , ὡς εἰπεῖν ἔπος .
How did it happen?

287	τίνι τρόπῳ ;
What son of mine led our army there?

288	λοιμοῦ τις ἦλθε σκηπτὸς ἢ στάσις πόλει

274	ἐστὶ δ’ οὐκ εὐέξοδον , ἄλλως τε πάντως κ- οἱ κατὰ χθονὸς θεοὶ λαβεῖν ἀμείνους εἰσὶν ἢ μεθιέναι .
Not easy is the path out of the tomb, for this reason above all, that the gods beneath the earth are readier to seize than to release.

275	ὅμως δ’ ἐκείνοις ἐνδυναστεύσας ἐγὼ ἥκω .
Nevertheless, since I have obtained dominion among them, I have come.

276	τάχυνε δ’ ὡς ἄμεμπτος ὦ χρόνου .
But make haste, so that I may not incur blame regarding the time of my sojourn.

277	τί ἐστι Πέρσαις νεοχμὸν ἐμβριθὲς κακόν ·
What is this unexpected ill that weighs the Persians down?

278 σέβομαι μὲν προσιδέσθαι , σέβομαι δ’ ἀντία λέξαι σέθεν ἀρχαίῳ περὶ τάρβει .
I shrink in awe from gazing upon you. I shrink in awe from speaking in your presence by reason of my former dread of you.

279 ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ κάτωθεν ἦλθον σοῖς γόοις πεπεισμένος , μή τι μακιστῆρα μῦθον , ἀλλὰ σύντομον λέγων εἰπὲ καὶ πέραινε πάντα , τὴν ἐμὴν αἰδῶ μεθείς .

279 ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ κάτωθεν ἦλθον σοῖς γόοις πεπεισμένος , μή τι μακιστῆρα μῦθον , ἀλλὰ σύντομον λέγων εἰπὲ καὶ πέραινε πάντα , τὴν ἐμὴν αἰδῶ μεθείς .
Since, in compliance with your moanings, I have come from the world below, lay aside your awe of me; make your tale not long, but brief; speak out and deliver your story in its entirety.

280 δίεμαι μὲν χαρίσασθαι , δίεμαι δ’ ἀντία φάσθαι , λέξας δύσλεκτα φίλοισιν .
I fear to do your bidding; I fear to speak in your presence and deliver to those I love news hard to utter.

281 ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ δέος παλαιὸν σοὶ φρενῶν ἀνθίσταται , τῶν ἐμῶν λέκτρων γεραιὰ ξύννομ’ εὐγενὲς γύναι , κλαυμάτων λήξασα τῶνδε καὶ γόων σαφές τί μοι λέξον ·
Since dread long ingrained in your mind restrains you, cease, noble woman, venerable partner of my bed, from your tears and laments, speak to me with all frankness.

282 ἀνθρώπεια δ’ ἄν τοι πήματ’ ἂν τύχοι βροτοῖς .
Afflictions ordained for human life must, we know, befall mankind.

283 πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θαλάσσης , πολλ

283 πολλὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ θαλάσσης , πολλὰ δ’ ἐκ χέρσου κακὰ γίγνεται θνητοῖς , ὁ μάσσων βίοτος ἢν ταθῇ , πρόσω .
For many calamities from the sea, many from the land, arise to mortal men if their span of life is extended far.

284 ὦ βροτῶν πάντων ὑπερσχὼν ὄλβον εὐτυχεῖ πότμῳ ὡς ἕως τ’ ἔλευσσες αὐγὰς ἡλίου ζηλωτὸς ὢν βίοτον εὐαίωνα Πέρσαις ὡς θεὸς διήγαγες , νῦν τέ σε ζηλῶ θανόντα , πρὶν κακῶν ἰδεῖν βάθος .
O you who in prosperity surpassed all mortal men by your happy destiny, since, so long as you gazed upon the beams of the sun, you lived a life of felicity, envied of all, in Persian eyes a god, so now too I consider you fortunate in that you died before you beheld the depth of our calamities.

285 πάντα γάρ , Δαρεῖ’ ἀκούσῃ μῦθον ἐν βραχεῖ χρόνῳ .
The whole tale, O Darius, you will hear in brief space of time: the power of Persia is ruined almost utterly.

286 διαπεπόρθηται τὰ Περσῶν πράγμαθ’ , ὡς εἰπεῖν ἔπος .
How did it happen?

287 τίνι τρόπῳ ;
What son of mine led our army there?

288	λοιμοῦ τις ἦλθε σκηπτὸς ἢ στάσις πόλει ;
Did some stroke of pestilence or factional strife come upon the State?

289	οὐδαμῶς ·
Neither;

290	ἀλλ’ ἀμφ’ Ἀθήνας πᾶς κατέφθαρται στρατός .
but near Athens our whole host has been brought to ruin.

291	τίς δ’ ἐμῶν ἐκεῖσε παίδων ἐστρατηλάτει ;
Tell me, what son of mine led our army there?

292	φράσον .
Speak.

293	θούριος Ξέρξης , κενώσας πᾶσαν ἠπείρου πλάκα .
Impetuous Xerxes, depopulating the whole surface of the continent.

294	πεζὸς ἢ ναύτης δὲ πεῖραν τήνδ’ ἐμώρανεν τάλας ;
Was it by land or sea that he made this mad expedition, the reckless man?

295	ἀμφότερα ·
By both.

296	διπλοῦν μέτωπον ἦν δυοῖν στρατευμάτοιν .
There was a twofold front of double armies.

297	πῶς δὲ καὶ στρατὸς τοσόσδε πεζὸς ἤνυσεν περᾶν ;
But how was it that so vast a land force won a passage to the farther shore?

298	μηχαναῖς ἔζευξεν Ἕλλης πορθμόν , ὥστ’ ἔχειν πόρον .
By a clever device he yoked the Hellespont so as to gain a passage.

299	καὶ τόδ’ ἐξέπραξεν , ὥστε Βόσπορον κλῇσαι μέγαν ·
What! Did he succeed in closing the mighty Bosporus?

300	ὧδ’ ἔχει ·
Yes indeed.

301	γνώμης δέ πού τις δαιμόνων ξυνήψατο .
One of the divine powers must have assisted him in his purpose.

302	φεῦ , μέγας τις ἦλθε δαίμων , ὥστε μὴ φρονεῖν καλῶς .
Alas! Some mighty power came upon him so that he was not able to think clearly.

303	ὡς ἰδεῖν τέλος πάρεστιν οἷον ἤνυσεν κακόν .
Yes, since we can see the outcome, what ruin he wrought.

304	καὶ τί δὴ πράξασιν αὐτοῖς ὧδ

304	καὶ τί δὴ πράξασιν αὐτοῖς ὧδ’ ἐπιστενάζετε ;
And how then did they fare that you now lament them?

305	ναυτικὸς στρατὸς κακωθεὶς πεζὸν ὤλεσε στρατόν .
Disaster to the naval force brought ruin to the force on land.

306	ὧδε παμπήδην δὲ λαὸς πᾶς κατέφθαρται δορί ;
And did the whole army utterly perish by the spear?

307	πρὸς τάδ’ ὡς Σούσων μὲν ἄστυ πᾶν κενανδρίαν στένει .
Yes, and it is for this reason that the whole city of Susa groans at its desolation.

308	ὦ πόποι κεδνῆς ἀρωγῆς κ- ἐπικουρίας στρατοῦ .
Alas for the loss of our warriors’ valiant force and defence!

309	Βακτρίων δ’ ἔρρει πανώλης δῆμος , οὐδέ τις γέρων .
And the host of the Bactrians is lost, wholly destroyed: not even an old man is left.

310	ὦ μέλεος , οἵαν ἄρ’ ἥβην ξυμμάχων ἀπώλεσεν .
Unhappy man, since he has brought to ruin the youth of our allies.

311	μονάδα δὲ Ξέρξην ἔρημόν φασιν οὐ πολλῶν μέτα — πῶς τε δὴ καὶ ποῖ τελευτᾶν ;
But Xerxes, alone and forlorn, with scanty train, they say—

312	ἔστι τις σωτηρία ;
Met his end, how, tell me, and where? Of his safety is there any hope?

313	ἄσμενον μολεῖν γέφυραν γαῖν δυοῖν ζευκτηρίαν .
To his joy he reached the bridge yoking the two continents.

314	καὶ πρὸς ἤπειρον σεσῶσθαι τήνδε , τοῦτ’ ἐτήτυμον ;
And reached our continent in safety? Is this certain?

315	ναί ·
Yes;

316	λόγος κρατεῖ σαφηνὴς τοῦτό γ’ , οὐδ’ ἔνι στάσις .
a proven report establishes this. Doubt there is none.

317	φεῦ , ταχεῖά γ’ ἦλθε χρησμῶν πρᾶξις , ἐς δὲ παῖδ’ ἐμὸν Ζεὺς ἀπέσκηψεν τελευτὴν θεσφάτων ·
Alas! The fulfilment of the oracles has indeed come swiftly, and it is my son upon whom Zeus has caused their issue to descend.

318	ἐγὼ δέ που διὰ μακροῦ χρόνου τάδ’ ηὔχουν ἐκτελευτήσειν θεούς ·
Yet I was confident that, only after long lapse of time, the gods would in some way bring them to accomplishment;

319	ἀλλ’ ὅταν σ

319	ἀλλ’ ὅταν σπεύδῃ τις αὐτός , κ- ὁ θεὸς συνάπτεται .
nevertheless, when man hastens to his own undoing, the god too participates with him.

320	νῦν κακῶν ἔοικε πηγὴ πᾶσιν ηὑρῆσθαι φίλοις .
A fountain of misfortune has now, I think, been discovered for all I love.

321	παῖς δ’ ἐμὸς τάδ’ οὐ κατειδὼς ἤνυσεν νέῳ θράσει ·
A son of mine it was who, in his ignorance, brought these things to pass through youthful recklessness;

322	ὅστις Ἑλλήσποντον ἱρὸν δοῦλον ὣς δεσμώμασιν ἤλπισε σχήσειν ῥέοντα , Βόσπορον ῥόον θεοῦ ·
for he conceived the hope that he could by shackles, as if it were a slave, restrain the current of the sacred Hellespont, the Bosporus, a stream divine;

323	καὶ πόρον μετερρύθμιζε , καὶ πέδαις σφυρηλάτοις περιβαλὼν πολλὴν κέλευθον ἤνυσεν πολλῷ στρατῷ , θνητὸς ὢν θεῶν τε πάντων ᾤετ’ , οὐκ εὐβουλίᾳ , καὶ Ποσειδῶνος κρατήσειν .
he set himself to fashion a roadway of a new type, and, by casting upon

323	καὶ πόρον μετερρύθμιζε , καὶ πέδαις σφυρηλάτοις περιβαλὼν πολλὴν κέλευθον ἤνυσεν πολλῷ στρατῷ , θνητὸς ὢν θεῶν τε πάντων ᾤετ’ , οὐκ εὐβουλίᾳ , καὶ Ποσειδῶνος κρατήσειν .
he set himself to fashion a roadway of a new type, and, by casting upon it hammer-wrought fetters, made a spacious causeway for his mighty host. Mortal though he was, he thought in his folly that he would gain the mastery of all the gods, yes, even over Poseidon.

324	πῶς τάδ’ οὐ νόσος φρενῶν εἶχε παῖδ’ ἐμόν ;
Must this not have been a disease of the soul that possessed my son?

325	δέδοικα μὴ πολὺς πλούτου πόνος ὁ- ἐμὸς ἀνθρώποις γένηται τοῦ φθάσαντος ἁρπαγή .
I fear that the plenteous treasure amassed by my toil may become the prey of the spoiler.

326	ταῦτά τοι κακοῖς ὁμιλῶν ἀνδράσιν διδάσκεται θούριος Ξέρξης ·
This lesson impetuous Xerxes learned through conversation with evil men.


327	λέγουσι δ’ ὡς σὺ μὲν μέγαν τέκνοις πλοῦτον ἐκτήσω ξὺν αἰχμῇ , τὸν δ’ ἀνανδρίας ὕπο ἔνδον αἰχμάζειν , πατρῷον δ’ ὄλβον οὐδὲν αὐξάνειν .
They say that you indeed won great wealth for your children by your spear, but he, from lack of manly spirit, wielded his at home and did not increase his paternal fortune.

328	τοιάδ’ ἐξ ἀνδρῶν ὀνείδη πολλάκις κλύων κακῶν τήνδ’ ἐβούλευσεν κέλευθον καὶ στράτευμ’ ἐφ’ Ἑλλάδα .
Hearing such taunts many times from evil counsellors, he planned this expedition and army against Hellas.

329	τοιγάρ σφιν ἔργον ἐστὶν ἐξειργασμένον μέγιστον , ἀείμνηστον , οἷον οὐδέπω τόδ’ ἄστυ Σούσων ἐξεκείνωσεν πεσόν , ἐξ οὗτε τιμὴν Ζεὺς ἄναξ τήνδ’ ὤπασεν , ἕν’ ἄνδρ’ ἁπάσης Ἀσίδος μηλοτρόφου ταγεῖν , ἔχοντα σκῆπτρον εὐθυντήριον .
Thus, they have wrought a deed greatest and most memorable, such as never before did this city of Susa send forth since the time when the Lord Zeus granted this honor, that one man should govern all Asia, rich in flocks, and bear the scepter of authority.

330	Μῆδος γὰρ ἦν ὁ πρῶτος ἡγεμὼν στρατοῦ ·
For Medus was the first commander of

330	Μῆδος γὰρ ἦν ὁ πρῶτος ἡγεμὼν στρατοῦ ·
For Medus was the first to be the leader of its host;

331	ἄλλος δ’ ἐκείνου παῖς τόδ’ ἔργον ἤνυσεν ·
and another, his son, completed his work since wisdom ruled his spirit.

332	φρένες γὰρ αὐτοῦ θυμὸν ᾠακοστρόφουν .
For his mind guided his spirit well.

333	τρίτος δ’ ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ Κῦρος , εὐδαίμων ἀνήρ , ἄρξας ἔθηκε πᾶσιν εἰρήνην φίλοις ·
Third, after him, Cyrus, blessed in good fortune, came to the throne and established peace for all his people.

334	Λυδῶν δὲ λαὸν καὶ Φρυγῶν ἐκτήσατο , Ἰωνίαν τε πᾶσαν ἤλασεν βίᾳ .
The Lydians and Phrygians he won to his rule, and the whole of Ionia he subdued by force;

335	θεὸς γὰρ οὐκ ἤχθηρεν , ὡς εὔφρων ἔφυ .
for he won the favor of the gods through his right-mindedness.

336	Κύρου δὲ παῖς τέταρτος ηὔθυνε στρατόν .
Fourth in succession, the son of Cyrus ruled the host.

337	πέμπτος δὲ Μάρδος ἦρξεν , αἰσχύνη πάτρᾳ θρόνοισί τ’ ἀρχαίοισι ·
Fifth in the list, Mardus came to power, a disgrace to his native land and to the ancient throne;

338	τὸν δὲ σὺν δόλῳ Ἀρταφρένης ἔκτεινεν ἐσθλὸς ἐν δόμοις , ξὺν ἀνδράσιν φίλοισιν , οἷς τόδ’ ἦν χρέος .
but he was slain in his palace by the guile of noble Artaphrenes, with the help of friends whose duty this was.

339	ἕκτος δὲ Μάραφις , ἕβδομος δ’ Ἀρταφρένης .
Sixth

339	ἕκτος δὲ Μάραφις , ἕβδομος δ’ Ἀρταφρένης .
Sixth came Maraphis, and seventh Artaphrenes.

340	κ- ἐγὼ πάλου τ’ ἔκυρσα τοῦπερ ἤθελον , κ- ἀπεστράτευσα πολλὰ σὺν πολλῷ στρατῷ ·
And I in turn attained the lot I desired, and many a campaign I made with a valiant force;

341	ἀλλ’ οὐ κακὸν τοσόνδε προσέβαλον πόλει .
but disaster so dire as this I brought not upon the state.

342	Ξέρξης δ’ ἐμὸς παῖς ὢν νέος νέα φρονεῖ , κ- οὐ μνημονεύει τὰς ἐμὰς ἐπιστολάς ·
Yet Xerxes my son, youth that he is, has the mind of youth and does not remember my injunctions.

343	εὖ γὰρ σαφῶς τόδ’ ἴστ’ , ἐμοὶ ξυνήλικες , ἅπαντες ἡμεῖς , οἳ κράτη τάδ’ ἔσχομεν , οὐκ ἂν φανεῖμεν πήματ’ ἔρξαντες τόσα .
Be sure of this, my age-mates: all of us who have held this sovereign power cannot be shown to have wrought ruin as great as this.

344	τί οὖν , ἄναξ Δαρεῖε , ποῖ καταστρέφεις λόγων τελευτήν ;
What then, O king Darius? What is the intention of your words?

345	πῶς ἂν ἐκ τούτων ἔτι πράσσοιμεν ὡς ἄριστα Περσικὸς λεώς ;
How, after this reverse, may we, the people of Persia, best prosper in time to come?

346	εἰ μὴ στρατεύοισθ’ ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήνων τόπον , μηδ’ εἰ στρά

346	εἰ μὴ στρατεύοισθ’ ἐς τὸν Ἑλλήνων τόπον , μηδ’ εἰ στράτευμα πλεῖον τὸ Μηδικόν .
If you do not take the field against the Hellenes’ land, even if the forces of the Medes outnumber theirs.

347	αὐτὴ γὰρ ἡ γῆ ξύμμαχος κείνοις πέλει .
The land itself is their ally.

348	πῶς τοῦτ’ ἔλεξας , τίνι τρόπῳ δὲ συμμαχεῖ ;
What do you mean? In what way their ally?

349	κτείνουσα λιμῷ τοὺς ὑπερπόλλους ἄγαν .
It wastes with famine an enemy force which is too large.

350	ἀλλ’ εὐσταλῆ τοι λεκτὸν ἀροῦμεν στόλον .
But we will dispatch a force of select and easily managed troops.

351	ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ὁ μείνας νῦν ἐν Ἑλλάδος τόποις στρατὸς κυρήσει νοστίμου σωτηρίας .
Not even the host which now remains in Hellas will be able to return to safety.

352	πῶς εἶπας ;
How is that?

353	οὐ γὰρ πᾶν στράτευμα βαρβάρων περᾷ τὸν Ἕλλης πορθμὸν Εὐρώπης ἄπο ;
Will not the whole barbarian army cross from Europe over the Hellespont?

354	παῦροι γε πολλῶν , εἴ τι πιστεῦσαι θεῶν χρὴ θεσφάτοισιν ,

354	παῦροι γε πολλῶν , εἴ τι πιστεῦσαι θεῶν χρὴ θεσφάτοισιν , ἐς τὰ νῦν πεπραγμένα βλέψαντα ·
Few indeed out of many, if it is right to put any faith in the oracles of Heaven, with regard to what has just been brought to pass;

355	συμβαίνει γὰρ οὐ τὰ μέν , τὰ δ’ οὔ .
for they are fulfilled, not just some, while others fail.

356	κ- εἴπερ τάδ’ ἐστί , πλῆθος ἔκκριτον στρατοῦ λείπει κεναῖσιν ἐλπίσιν πεπεισμένος .
And if this is truth, it is through persuasion of vain hopes that he is leaving behind a body of picked troops.

357	μίμνουσι δ’ ἔνθα πεδίον Ἀσωπὸς ῥοαῖς ἄρδει , φίλον πίασμα Βοιωτῶν χθονί ·
They are now lingering where the plain is watered by the stream of Asopus which nourishes Boeotia’s fields.

358	οὗ σφιν κακῶν ὕψιστ’ ἐπαμμένει παθεῖν , ὕβρεως ἄποινα κ- ἀθέων φρονημάτων ·
Here they will meet their crowning disaster in requital for their presumptuous pride and impious thoughts.

359	οἳ γῆν μολόντες Ἑλλάδ’ οὐ θεῶν βρέτη ᾐδοῦντο συλᾶν οὐδὲ πιμπράναι νεώς ·
For, on reaching the land of Hellas, restrained by no religious awe, they ravaged the images of the gods and set fire to their temples.

360 βωμοὶ δ’ ἄιστοι , δαιμόνων θ’ ἱδρύματα πρόρριζα φύρδην ἐξανέστραπται βάθρων .
Altars have been destroyed, statues of the gods have been thrown from their bases in utter ruin and confusion.

361 τοιγὰρ κακῶς δράσαντες οὐκ ἐλάσσονα πάσχουσι , τὰ δὲ μέλλουσι , κ- οὐδέπω κακῶν κρηνὶς ἀπέσβηκ’ ἀλλ’ ἔτ’ ἐκπιδύεται .
Therefore, since they wrought such evil, evil they suffer in no less measure; and other evils are still in store: the spring of their woes is not yet quenched, but it still wells forth.

362 τόσος γὰρ ἔσται πέλανος αἱματοσφαγὴς πρὸς γῇ Πλαταιῶν Δωρίδος λόγχης ὕπο ·
For so great will be the mass of clotted gore spilled by the Dorian lance upon Plataean soil

363 θῖνες νεκρῶν δὲ καὶ τριτοσπόρῳ γονῇ ἄφωνα σημανοῦσιν ὄμμασιν βροτῶν ὡς οὐχ ὑπέρφευ θνητὸν ὄντα χρὴ φρονεῖν .
that heaps of dead will reveal, even to the third generation, a voiceless record for the eyes of men that mortal man should not vaunt himself excessively.

364 ὕβρις γὰρ ἐξανθοῦσ’ ἐκάρπωσεν στάχυν ἄτης , ὅθεν πάγκλαυτον ἐξαμᾷ θέρος .
For presumptuous pride, when it has matured, bears as its fruit a crop of calamity, from which it reaps an abundant harvest of tears.

365 τοιαῦθ’ ὁρῶντες τῶνδε τ- ἐπιτίμια μέμνησθ’ Ἀθηνῶν Ἑλλάδος τε , μηδέ τις ὑπερφρονήσας τὸν παρόντα δαίμονα ἄλλων ἐρασθεὶς ὄλβον ἐ

365 τοιαῦθ' ὁρῶντες τῶνδε τ- ἐπιτίμια μέμνησθ' Ἀθηνῶν Ἑλλάδος τε, μηδέ τις ὑπερφρονήσας τὸν παρόντα δαίμονα ἄλλων ἐρασθεὶς ὄλβον ἐκχέῃ μέγαν.
Bear in mind that such are the penalties for deeds like these, and hold Athens and Hellas in your memory. Let no one of you, through disdain of present fortune and lust for more, squander his abundant wealth.

366 Ζεύς τοι κολαστὴς τῶν ὑπερκόμπων

366 Ζεύς τοι κολαστὴς τῶν ὑπερκόμπων ἄγαν φρονημάτων ἔπεστιν, εὔθυνος βαρύς.
Zeus, in truth, is a chastiser of overweening pride and corrects with heavy hand.

367 πρὸς ταῦτ' ἐκεῖνον, σωφρονεῖν κεχρημένον, πινύσκετ' εὐλόγοισι νουθετήμασιν, λῆξαι θεοβλαβοῦνθ' ὑπερκόμπῳ θράσει.
Therefore, now that my son has been warned to be prudent by the voice of God, instruct him with admonitions of reason to cease from drawing the punishment of Heaven on himself by his vaunting rashness.

368 σὺ δ', ὦ γεραιὰ μῆτερ ἡ Ξέρξου φίλη, ἐλθοῦσ' ἐς οἴκους κόσμον ὅστις εὐπρεπὴς λαβοῦσ' ὑπαντίαζε παιδί.
And as for you, beloved and venerable mother of Xerxes, withdraw to the palace and bring from there clothing which is suitable for him, and prepare to meet your son.

369 πάντα γὰρ κακῶν ὑπ' ἄλγους λακίδες ἀμφὶ σώματι στημορραγοῦσι ποικίλων ἐσθημάτων.
For through grief at his misfortunes, the embroidered apparel which he was wearing has been torn into tattered shreds.

370 ἀλλ' αὐτὸν εὐφρόνως σὺ πράυνον λόγοις.
Soothe him with words of kindness;

371 μόνης γάρ, οἶδα, σοῦ κλύων ἀνέξεται.
for it is to your voice alone, I know, that he will listen.

372 ἐγὼ δ' ἄπειμι γῆς ὑπὸ ζόφον κάτω.
As for me, I depart to the darkness beneath the earth.


373	ὑμεῖς δέ , πρέσβεις , χαίρετ’ , ἐν κακοῖς ὅμως ψυχῇ διδόντες ἡδονὴν καθ’ ἡμέραν , ὡς τοῖς θανοῦσι πλοῦτος οὐδὲν ὠφελεῖ .
Farewell, Elders, and despite your troubles, rejoice while each day is yours; for wealth does not profit the dead at all.

374	ἦ πολλὰ καὶ παρόντα καὶ μέλλοντ’ ἔτι ἤλγησ’ ἀκούσας βαρβάροισι πήματα .
I grieve as I hear the many misfortunes that are now, and are yet to be, the lot of the barbarians.

375	ὦ δαῖμον , ὥς με πόλλ’ ἐσέρχεται κακὰ ἄλγη , μάλιστα δ’ ἥδε συμφορὰ δάκνει , ἀτιμίαν γε παιδὸς ἀμφὶ σώματι ἐσθημάτων κλύουσαν , ἥ νιν ἀμπέχει .
O God, how many sorrows enter my soul, but this misfortune wounds me the most, hearing of the disgrace my son endures in his clothing, which now enfolds him.

376	ἀλλ’ εἶμι , καὶ λαβοῦσα κόσμον ἐκ δόμων ὑπαντιάζειν παιδί μου πειράσομαι .
But I will go, and having taken suitable garments from the palace, I will attempt to meet my son.

377	οὐ γὰρ τὰ φίλτατ’ ἐν κακοῖς προδώσομεν .
For we must not forsake our dearest ones in their misfortune.

378	ὦ πόποι ἦ μεγάλας ἀγαθᾶς τε πολισσονόμου βιοτᾶς ἐπεκύρσαμεν , εὖθ’ ὁ γηραιὸς πανταρκὴς ἀκάκας ἄμαχος βασιλεὺς ἰσόθεος

378	ὦ πόποι ἦ μεγάλας ἀγαθᾶς τε πολισσονόμου βιοτᾶς ἐπεκύρσαμεν , εὖθ’ ὁ γηραιὸς πανταρκὴς ἀκάκας ἄμαχος βασιλεὺς ἰσόθεος Δαρεῖος ἆρχε χώρας .
Oh, what great prosperity and a life well-ordered under civil rule we enjoyed, back when the aged, all-powerful, harmless, peace-loving king, god-like Darius, ruled the land.

379	πρῶτα μὲν εὐδοκίμους στρατιὰς ἀπεφαινόμεθ’ , ἠδὲ νομίσματα πύργινα πάντ’ ἐπηύθυνε , νόστοι δ’ ἐκ πολέμων ἀπόνους ἀπαθεῖς ἀνέρας εὖ πράσσοντας ἆγον οἴκους .
Firstly, we were renowned for our admirable armies, and all our institutions were well-ordered like strong towers; our men returned from wars unharmed and untroubled, leading their lives successfully at home.

380	ὅσσας δ’ εἷλε πόλεις πόρον οὐ διαβὰς Ἅλυος ποταμοῖο , οὐδ’ ἀφ’ ἑστίας συθείς , οἷ

380	ὅσσας δ’ εἷλε πόλεις πόρον οὐ διαβὰς Ἅλυος ποταμοῖο , οὐδ’ ἀφ’ ἑστίας συθείς , οἷαι Στρυμονίου πελάγους Ἀχελωίδες εἰσὶ πάροικοι Θρῃκίων ἐπαύλων ,
He captured so many cities without crossing the stream of Halys or leaving his home, like the cities on the Strymonian sea, neighbors to the Thracian dwellings.

381	λίμνας τ’ ἔκτοθεν αἳ κατὰ χέρσον ἐληλαμέναι πέρι πύργον τοῦδ’ ἄνακτος ἄιον , Ἕλλας τ’ ἀμφὶ πόρον πλατὺν εὐχόμεναι , μυχία τε Προποντίς , καὶ στόμωμα Πόντου ·
And those outside the lake, the cities on the mainland, surrounded with a rampart, obeyed him as their king; those, too, that boast to be on both sides of the broad Hellespont and Propontis, deeply-recessed, and the outlet of Pontus.

382	νᾶσοί θ’ αἳ κατὰ πρῶν’ ἅλιον περίκλυστοι τᾷδε γᾷ προσήμεναι οἵα Λέσβος ἐλαιόφυτός τε Σάμος , Χίος ἠδὲ Πάρος , Νάξος , Μύκονος , Τήνῳ τε συνάπτουσ’ Ἀνδρος ἀγχιγείτων ,
The sea-washed islands, also, off the projecting arm
of the sea, lying close to this land of ours, such as Lesbos, and olive-planted Samos, Chios and Paros, Naxos, Mykonos,
and Andros which lies adjacent to Tenos.

383	καὶ τὰς ἀγχιάλους ἐκράτυνε μεσάκτους , Λῆμνον , Ἰκάρου θ’ ἕδος , καὶ Ῥόδον ἠδὲ Κνίδον Κυπρίας τε πόλεις , Πάφον , ἠδὲ Σόλους , Σαλαμῖνά τε , τᾶς νῦν ματρόπολις τῶνδ’ αἰτία στεναγμῶν .
And he held under his sway the sea-girt islands midway between the continents, Lemnos, and the settlement of Icarus, and Rhodes, and Cnidos, and the Cyprian cities Paphos, Soli, and Salamis, whose mother-city is now the cause of our lament.

384	καὶ τὰς εὐκτεάνους κατὰ κλῆρον Ἰαόνιον πολυάνδρους Ἑλλάνων ἐκράτει σφετέραις φρεσίν .
And the rich and populous cities of the Hellenes in the Ionian heritage he controlled by his own will.

385	ἀκάματον δὲ παρῆν σθένος

385	ἀκάματον δὲ παρῆν σθένος ἀνδρῶν τευχηστήρων παμμίκτων τ’ ἐπικούρων .
And at his command he had an unwearied strength of men-at-arms and of allies from every nation.

386	νῦν δ’ οὐκ ἀμφιλόγως θεότρεπτα τάδ’ αὖ φέρομεν πολέμοισι δμαθέντες μεγάλως πλαγαῖσι ποντίαισιν .
But now, worsted completely in war through disasters on the sea, we endure this change of fortune no doubt from the hand of god.

387	ἰώ , δύστηνος ἐγὼ στυγερᾶς μοίρας τῆσδε κυρήσας ἀτεκμαρτοτάτης , ὡς ὠμοφρόνως δαίμων ἐνέβη Περσῶν γενεᾷ ·
Alas, wretched am I who have met this cruel doom which did not give the faintest sign of its coming! In what savage mood has Fortune trampled upon the Persian race?

388	τί πάθω τλήμων ;
What misery is yet in store for me, unhappy wretch?

389	λέλυται γ

389	λέλυται γὰρ ἐμοὶ γυίων ῥώμη τήνδ’ ἡλικίαν ἐσιδόντ’ ἀστῶν .
The strength of my limbs is loosened as I look upon this aged group of citizens.

390	εἴθ’ ὄφελεν , Ζεῦ , κ- ἐμὲ μετ’ ἀνδρῶν τῶν οἰχομένων θανάτου κατὰ μοῖρα καλύψαι .
Ah, Zeus, I wish that the doom of death had buried me, too, together with the men who have been laid low!

391	ὀτοτοῖ , βασιλεῦ , στρατιᾶς ἀγαθῆς καὶ περσονόμου τιμῆς μεγάλης , κόσμου τ’ ἀνδρῶν , οὓς νῦν δαίμων ἐπέκειρεν .
Alas, my king, for our noble army, for the high honor of Persia’s rule, and for the splendor of the men now cut off by Fate!

392	γᾶ δ’ αἰάζει τὰν ἐγγαίαν ἥβαν Ξέρξᾳ κταμέναν Ἅιδου σάκτορι Περσᾶν .
The land bewails her native youth, slaughtered for Xerxes, who has crowded Hades with Persian slain.

393	ᾁδοβάται γὰρ πολλοὶ φῶτες , χώρας ἄνθος , τοξοδάμαντες , πάνυ ταρφύς τις μυριὰς ἀνδρῶν , ἐξέφθινται .
Many warriors, masters of the bow, our country’s pride, a great multitude of men, have perished.

394	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ κεδνᾶς ἀλκᾶς .
Alas, alas, for our trusty defense!

395	Ἀσία δὲ χθών , βασιλεῦ γαίας , αἰνῶς αἰνῶς ἐπὶ γόνυ κέκλιται .
The land of Asia, the leading power of the earth, has piteously, yes piteously, been bowed to her knees.

396	ὅδ’ ἐγώ , οἰοῖ , αἰακτ

396	ὅδ’ ἐγώ , οἰοῖ , αἰακτὸς μέλεος γέννᾳ γᾷ τε πατρῴᾳ κακὸν ἄρ’ ἐγενόμαν .
Behold me, alas, a fitting subject for lamentation, born a source of ruin to my race and fatherland.

397	πρόσφθογγόν σοι νόστου τὰν κακοφάτιδα βοάν , κακομέλετον ἰὰν Μαριανδυνοῦ θρηνητῆρος πέμψω πέμψω , πολύδακρυν ἰαχάν .
As a greeting for your return home I will lift up an ill-omened cry of woe, the voice, versed in lamentation, of a Mariandynian mourner, a wail attended by many a tear.

398	ἵετ’ αἰανῆ καὶ πάνδυρτον δύσθροον αὐδάν .
I will send forth a mournful and utterly grievous sound.


399 δαίμων γὰρ ὅδ’ αὖ μετάτροπος ἐπ’ ἐμοί .
For this demon of ill-fortune has again changed its course against me.

400 ἥσω τοι τὰν πάνδυρτον , σὰ πάθη τε σέβων ἁλίτυπά τε βάρη , πόλεως γέννας πενθητῆρος ·
I will indeed utter the song of lamentation, in commemoration of your sufferings and of our strongly-manned ships, buffeted by waves; the plaintive strain of our land which mourns its sons.

401 κλάγξω κλάγξω δὲ γόον ἀρίδακρυν .
And I will cry aloud in lamentation, shedding many a tear.

402 Ἰάνων γὰρ ἀπηύρα , Ἰάνων ναύφρακτος Ἄρης ἑτεραλκὴς νυχίαν πλάκα κερσάμενος δυσδαίμονά τ’ ἀκτάν .
Yes, for the Ionian naval force, turning the tide of battle, swept them away, the Ionian host, ravaging the dark sea and the shore of doom.

403 οἰοιοῖ βόα καὶ πάντ’ ἐκπεύθου .
Woe! woe! cry aloud, learn about the whole disaster.

404 — ποῦ δὲ φίλων ἄλλος ὄχλος , ποῦ

404 — ποῦ δὲ φίλων ἄλλος ὄχλος , ποῦ δέ σοι παραστάται , οἷος ἦν Φαρανδάκης , Σούσας , Πελάγων , καὶ Δοτάμας , ἠδ’ Ἀγδαβάτας , Ψάμμις , Σουσισκάνης τ’ Ἀγβάτανα λιπών ;
Where is the rest of the multitude of your comrades? Where are those who stood by your side, such as Pharandaces, Susas, Pelagon, Dotamas, and Agdabatas, Psammis, and Susiscanes of Agbatana?

405 ὀλοοὺς ἀπέλειπον Τυρίας ἐκ ναὸς ἔρροντας ἐπ’ ἀκταῖς Σαλαμινιάσι στυφελοῦ θείνοντας ἐπ’ ἀκτᾶς .
By the shores of Salamis, dashing against its rugged shore, I left them, fallen in death from a Tyrian ship.

406 οἰοιοῖ , βόα ·
Woe! woe! cry aloud!

407 ποῦ σοι Φαρνοῦχος Ἀριόμαρδός τ’ ἀγαθός , ποῦ δὲ Σευάλκης ἄναξ , ἢ Λίλαιος εὐπάτωρ , Μέμφις , Θάρυβις , καὶ Μασίστρας , Ἀρτεμβάρης τ’ ἠδ’ Ὑσταίχμας ;
Where is your beloved Pharnuchus, and the courageous Ariomardus? Where is prince Seualces, or Lilaeus of noble lineage, Memphis, Tharybis, and Masistras, Artembares and Hysta

407 ποῦ σοι Φαρνοῦχος Ἀριόμαρδός τ’ ἀγαθός , ποῦ δὲ Σευάλκης ἄναξ , ἢ Λίλαιος εὐπάτωρ , Μέμφις , Θάρυβις , καὶ Μασίστρας , Ἀρτεμβάρης τ’ ἠδ’ Ὑσταίχμας ;
Where is your beloved Pharnuchus, and the courageous Ariomardus? Where is prince Seualces, or Lilaeus of noble lineage, Memphis, Tharybis, and Masistras, Artembares and Hystaechmas?

408 τάδε σ’ ἐπανερόμαν .
This I ask you.

409 ἰὼ ἰώ μοί μοι τὰς ὠγυγίους κατιδόντες στυγνὰς Ἀθάνας πάντες ἑνὶ πιτύλῳ , ἐὴ ἐή , τλάμονες ἀσπαίρουσι χέρσῳ .
Woe, woe is me! They beheld ancient and hateful Athens and with one convulsive struggle (alas, alas !) poor wretches, they lie gasping on the shore.

408	τάδε σ’ ἐπανερόμαν .
This I ask of you.

409	ἰὼ ἰώ μοί μοι τὰς ὠγυγίους κατιδόντες στυγνὰς Ἀθάνας πάντες ἑνὶ πιτύλῳ , ἐὴ ἐή , τλάμονες ἀσπαίρουσι χέρσῳ .
Woe, woe is me! They beheld ancient and hateful Athens and with one convulsive struggle (alas, alas!) poor wretches, they lie gasping on the shore.

410	ἦ καὶ τὸν Περσᾶν αὐτοῦ τὸν σὸν πιστὸν πάντ’ ὀφθαλμὸν μυρία μυρία πεμπαστὰν Βατανώχου παῖδ’ Ἄλπιστον τοῦ Σησάμα τοῦ Μεγαβάτα , Πάρθον τε μέγαν τ’ Οἰβάρην ἔλιπες ἔλιπες ;
Did you really lose your trusty eye there, that which counted tens upon tens of thousands of the Persians, Batanochus' son Alpistus, son of Sesames, Megabates' son, Parthos and mighty Oebares, did you leave these behind?

411	ὢ ὢ ὢ δᾴων .
Alas, alas, the unhappy men!

412	Πέρσαις ἀγαυοῖς κακὰ πρόκακα λέγεις .
You speak of woe, surpassing woe, for noble Persians.

413	ἰὼ ἰὼ δῆτα ἴυγγ’ ἀγαθῶν ἑτάρων μοι ὑπομιμνήσκεις κινεῖς ἄλαστα στυγνὰ πρόκακα λέγων .
In truth, you stir yearning in me for my gallant comrades when you tell

413	ἰὼ ἰὼ δῆτα ἴυγγ’ ἀγαθῶν ἑτάρων μοι ὑπομιμνήσκεις κινεῖς ἄλαστα στυγνὰ πρόκακα λέγων .
In truth you stir yearning in me for my gallant comrades when you tell me of woe, surpassing woe, hateful and unforgettable.

414	βοᾷ βοᾷ μοι μελέων ἔντοσθεν ἦτορ .
The heart within me cries out aloud for the wretched ones.

415	καὶ μὴν ἄλλους γε ποθοῦμεν , Μάρδων ἀνδρῶν μυριοταγὸν Ξάνθιν ἄρειόν τ’ Ἀγχάρην , Δίαιξίν τ’ ἠδ’ Ἀρσάκην ἱππιάνακτας , Κηγδαδάταν καὶ Λυθίμναν Τόλμον τ’ αἰχμᾶς ἀκόρεστον .
And yet there are others too whom we miss: Xanthis, commander of a myriad Mardian men, and warlike Anchares, Diaexis, too, and Arsaces, captains of the horse, Cegdadatas and Lythimnas, and Tolmus, insatiate in war.

416	ἔταφον ἔταφον , οὐκ ἀμφὶ σκηναῖς τροχηλάτοισιν ὄπιθεν δ’ ἔλιπες ἔλιπες ;
I marvel,

416	ἔταφον ἔταφον , οὐκ ἀμφὶ σκηναῖς τροχηλάτοισιν ὄπιθεν δ’ ἔλιπες ἔλιπες ;
I marvel, that they do not follow behind around your wheeled tent.

417	ἑπομένους .
I marvel that they do not follow behind around your wheeled tent.

418 βεβᾶσι γὰρ τοίπερ ἀγρέται στρατοῦ .
Gone are they who were leaders of the host.

419 βεβᾶσιν , οἴ , νώνυμοι .
Gone, alas, ingloriously.

420 ἰὴ ἰή , ἰὼ ἰώ .
Alas, alas!

421 ἰὼ ἰώ , δαίμονες , ἔθεθ’ ἄελπτον κακὸν διαπρέπον , οἷον δέδορκεν Ἄτα .
Alas, alas, you powers divine, you brought ruin upon us, unexpected, unmistakable to see, as is the glance of calamity.

422 πεπλήγμεθ’ οἵᾳ δι’ αἰῶνος τύχᾳ ·
We have been stricken by misfortune such as will endure for ages.

423 πεπλήγμεθ’ ·
We have been stricken; it is abundantly clear.

424 εὔδηλα γάρ ·
Yes, clearly so.

425 ν

425 νέᾳ νέᾳ δύᾳ δύᾳ .
By strange woe, strange woe!

426 κύρσαντες οὐκ εὐτυχῶς Ἰάνων ναυβατᾶν .
It was with bad luck that we encountered Ionia’s mariners.

427 δυσπόλεμον δὴ γένος τὸ Περσᾶν .
Unfortunate in war, indeed, is Persia’s race.

428 πῶς δ’ οὔ ;
How true it is!

429 στρατὸν μὲν τοσοῦτον τάλας πέπληγμαι .
In the

429 στρατὸν μὲν τοσοῦτον τάλας πέπληγμαι .
In the loss of so great an army I have indeed been dealt a blow, wretched as I am.

430 τί δ’ οὔκ ;
What that belonged to Persia, unfortunate one, has not been destroyed?

431 ὄλωλεν μεγάλως τὰ Περσᾶν .
Has not Persia been destroyed utterly?

432 ὁρᾷς τὸ λοιπὸν τόδε τᾶς ἐμᾶς στολᾶς ;
Do you see this remnant of my royal robe?

433 ὁρῶ ὁρῶ .
Yes, I do indeed.

434 τόνδε τ’ ὀιστοδέγμονα — τί τόδε λέγεις σεσωσμένον ;
And this quiver—what is this you say has been saved?

435 θησαυρὸν βελέεσσιν ;
Treasury for shafts?

436 βαιά γ’ ὡς ἀπὸ πολλῶν .
Truly a small remnant from an ample store.

437 ἐσπανίσμεθ’ ἀρωγῶν .
We have been deprived of defenders.

438 Ἰάνων λαὸς οὐ φυγαίχμας .
Ionia’s people shrink not from the spear.

439 ἀγανόρειος ·
They are a war-like people.

440 κατεῖδον δὲ πῆμ’ ἄελπτον .
I have lived to behold a calamity I never expected.

441	τραπέντα ναύφρακτον ἐρεῖς ὅμιλον ;
Are you speaking of the routed multitude which manned your ships?

442	πέπλον δ’ ἐπέρρηξ’ ἐπὶ συμφορᾷ κακοῦ .
And I rent my robe at the disastrous event.

443	παπαῖ παπαῖ .
Alas, alas!

444	καὶ πλέον ἢ παπαῖ μὲν οὖν .
No, far worse than alas.

445	δίδυμα γάρ ἐστι καὶ τριπλᾶ — λυπρά , χάρματα δ’ ἐχθροῖς .
Yes, for twofold and threefold—pain to us, but exultation to our enemies.

446	καὶ σθένος γ’ ἐκολούσθη — γυμνός εἰμι προπομπῶν .
Yes, and our strength has been maimed. I am stripped of my escort.

447	φίλων ἄταισι ποντίαισιν ·
By the disasters of your comrades upon the sea.

448	δίαινε δίαινε πῆμα ·
Weep, weep over our calamity,

449	πρὸς δόμους δ’ ἴθι .
and depart to your homes.

450	α

450	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ , δύα δύα .
Alas, alas, woe, woe!

451	βόα νυν ἀντίδουπά μοι .
Cry aloud now in response to me.

452	δόσιν κακὰν κακῶν κακοῖς .
A wretched offering from the wretched to the wretched.

453	ἴυζε μέλος ὁμοῦ τιθείς .
Cry out, tuning your strain to mine.

454	ὀτοτοτοτοῖ .
Oh, oh! That which has happened is grievous indeed.

455	βαρεῖά γ’ ἅδε συμφορά .
Alas, for I too share in your sorrow.

456	οἲ μάλα καὶ τόδ’ ἀλγῶ .
Strike, strike, and groan for my sake.

457	ἔρεσσ’ ἔρεσσε καὶ στέναζ’ ἐμὴν χάριν .
I weep in lamentation!

458	διαίνομαι γοεδνὸς ὤν .
Now cry aloud in

458	διαίνομαι γοεδνὸς ὤν .
Now cry aloud in response to me.

459	βόα νυν ἀντίδουπά μοι .
Cry aloud now in response to me.

460	μέλειν πάρεστι , δέσποτα .
This care, my lord, is mine.

461	ἐπορθίαζέ νυν γόοις .
Lift up your voice now in lamentation.

462	ὀτοτοτοτοῖ .
Oh, oh!

463	μέλαινα δ’ ἀμμεμείξεται , οἴ , στονόεσσα πλαγά .
And with our wailing, alas, will be mingled bruising blows and shrieks of pain.

464	καὶ στέρν’ ἄρασσε κ- ἐπιβόα τὸ Μύσιον .
Beat your breast too, and raise the Mysian wail.

465	ἄνι’ ἄνια .
Anguish, anguish!

466	καί μοι γενείου πέρθε λευκήρη τρίχα .
And tear, I beg of you, the white hair from your beard.

467	ἄπριγδ’ ἄπριγδα μάλα γοεδνά .
With clenched nails, with clenched nails, with loud wailing.

468	ἀύτει δ’ ὀξύ .
And utter shrill cries.

469	καὶ τάδ’ ἔρξω .
This too I will do.

470	πέπλον δ’ ἔρεικε κολπίαν ἀκμῇ χερῶν .
And with your fingers tear the robe which drapes you.

471	ἄνι’ ἄνια .
Anguish, anguish!

472	καὶ ψάλλ’ ἔθειραν καὶ κατοίκτισαι στρατόν .
Pluck out your locks, and lament our host.

473	ἄπριγδ’ ἄπριγδα μάλα γοεδνά .
With clenched nails,

473	ἄπριγδ’ ἄπριγδα μάλα γοεδνά .
With clenched nails, with clenched nails, with loud wailing.

474	διαίνου δ’ ὄσσε .
Let tears moisten your eyes.

475	τέγγομαί τοι .
I am drenched with tears.

476	βόα νυν

476	βόα νυν ἀντίδουπά μοι .
Cry aloud now in response to me.

477	οἰοῖ οἰοῖ .
Alas, alas!

478	αἰακτὸς ἐς δόμους κίε .
With sounds of wailing go to your homes.

479	ἰὼ ἰώ , Περσὶς αἶα δύσβατος .
Alas, alas! O Persian land, grievous now to walk upon!

480	ἰωὰ δὴ κατ’ ἄστυ .
Alas! through the city.

481	ἰωὰ δῆτα , ναὶ ναί .
Alas, indeed!

482	γοᾶσθ’ ἁβροβάται .
Pour forth your wails as you move along with soft steps.

483	ἰὼ ἰώ , Περσὶς αἶα δύσβατος .
Alas, alas, O Persian land, grievous now to walk upon!

484	ἰὴ ἰὴ τρισκάλμοισιν , ἰὴ ἰή , βάρισιν ὀλόμενοι .
Ah me! Those that perished in three-tiered galleys, ah me!

485	πέμψω τοί σε δυσθρόοις γόοις .
I will escort you with dismal sounds of woe.

