1 Ἑρμῆ χθόνιε, πατρῷ’ ἐποπτεύων κράτη, σωτὴρ γενοῦ μοι ξύμμαχός τ’ αἰτουμένῳ ·
Hermes of the nether world, you who guard the powers that are your father’s, prove yourself my savior and ally, I entreat you, 

2 ἥκω γὰρ ἐς γῆν τήνδε καὶ κατέρχομαι.
now that I have come to this land and returned from exile.


3 τύμβου δ’ ἐπ’ ὄχθῳ τῷδε κηρύσσω πατρὶ κλύειν, ἀκοῦσαι πλόκαμον Ἰνάχῳ θρεπτήριον.
On this mounded grave I cry out to my father to hearken, to hear me.

Look, I bring a lock to Inachus in requital for his care, 

4 τὸν δεύτερον δὲ τόνδε πενθητήριον οὐ γὰρ παρὼν ᾤμωξα σόν, πάτερ, μόρον οὐδ’ ἐξέτεινα χεῖρ’ ἐπ’ ἐκφορᾷ νεκροῦ.
and here, a second, in token of my grief. For I was not present, father, to lament your death, nor did I stretch forth my hand to bear your corpse.

5 τί χρῆμα λεύσσω;
What is this I see?

6 τίς ποθ’ ἥδ’ ὁμήγυρις στείχει γυναικῶν φάρεσιν μελαγχίμοις πρέπουσα;
What is this throng of women that moves in state, marked by their sable cloaks?

7 ποίᾳ ξυμφορᾷ προσεικάσω;
To what calamity should I set this down?

8 πότερα δόμοισι πῆμα προσκυρεῖ νέον;
Is it some new sorrow that befalls our house?

9 ἢ πατρὶ τ- ἐμῷ τάσδ’ ἐπεικάσας τύχω χοὰς φερούσας νερτέροις μειλίγματα;
Or am I right to suppose that for my father’s sake they bear these libations to appease the powers below?

10 οὐδέν ποτ’ ἄλλο ·
It can only be for this cause: 



11 καὶ γὰρ Ἠλέκτραν δοκῶ στείχειν ἀδελφὴν τὴν ἐμὴν πένθει λυγρῷ πρέπουσαν.
for indeed I think my own sister Electra is approaching, distinguished by her bitter grief.


12 ὦ Ζεῦ, δός με τείσασθαι μόρον πατρός, γενοῦ δὲ σύμμαχος θέλων ἐμοί.
Oh grant me, Zeus, to avenge my father’s death, and may you be my willing ally!

13 Πυλάδη, σταθῶμεν ἐκποδών, ὡς ἂν σαφῶς μάθω γυναικῶν ἥτις ἥδε προστροπή.
Pylades, let us stand apart, that I may know clearly what this band of suppliant women intends.



14 ἰαλτὸς ἐκ δόμων ἔβαν χοὰς προπομπὸς ὀξύχειρι σὺν κτύπῳ.
Sent forth from the palace I have come to convey libations to the sound of sharp blows of my hands.



15 πρέπει παρηὶς φοινίοις ἀμυγμοῖς ὄνυχος ἄλοκι νεοτόμῳ ·
My cheek is marked with bloody gashes where my nails have cut fresh furrows.


16 δι’ αἰῶνος δ’ ἰυγμοῖσι βόσκεται κέαρ.
And yet through all my life my heart is fed with lamentation.



17 λινοφθόροι δ’ ὑφασμάτων λακίδες ἔφλαδον ὑπ’ ἄλγεσιν, προστέρνῳ στολμῷ πέπλων ἀγελάστοις ξυμφοραῖς πεπληγμένων.
Rips are torn by my griefs through the linen web of my garment, torn in the cloth that covers my breast, the cloth of robes struck for the sake of my mirthless misfortunes.

18 τορὸς δὲ Φοῖβος ὀρθόθριξ δόμων ὀνειρόμαντις, ἐξ ὕπνου κότον πνέων, ἀωρόνυκτον ἀμβόαμα μυχόθεν ἔλακε περὶ φόβῳ, γυναικείοισιν ἐν δώμασιν βαρὺς πίτνων.
For with a hair-raising shriek, Terror, the diviner of dreams for our house, breathing wrath out of sleep, uttered a cry of terror in the dead of night from the heart of the palace, a cry that fell heavily on the women’s quarter.

19 κριταί τε τῶνδ’ ὀνειράτων θεόθεν ἔλακον ὑπέγγυοι μέμφεσθαι τοὺς γᾶς νέρθεν περιθύμως τοῖς κτανοῦσί τ’ ἐγκοτεῖν.
And the readers of these dreams, bound under pledge, cried out from the god that those beneath the earth cast furious reproaches and rage against their murderers.

20	τοιάνδε χάριν ἀχάριτον ἀπότροπον κακῶν, ἰὼ γαῖα μαῖα, μωμένα μ’ ἰάλλει δύσθεος γυνά.
Intending to ward off evil with such a graceless grace, O mother Earth, she sends me forth, godless woman that she is.

21	φοβοῦμαι δ’ ἔπος τόδ’ ἐκβαλεῖν.
But I am afraid to utter the words she charged me to speak.

22	τί γὰρ λύτρον πεσόντος αἵματος πέδοι;
For what atonement is there for blood fallen to earth?

23	ἰὼ πάνοιζυς ἑστία, ἰὼ κατασκαφαὶ δόμων.
Ah, hearth of utter grief! Ah, house laid low in ruin!

24	ἀνήλιοι βροτοστυγεῖς δνόφοι καλύπτουσι δόμους δεσποτῶν θανάτοισι.
Sunless darkness, loathed by men, enshrouds our house due to the death of its master.

25	σέβας δ’ ἄμαχον ἀδάματον ἀπόλεμον τὸ πρὶν δι’ ὤτων φρενός τε δαμίας περαῖνον νῦν ἀφίσταται.
The awe of majesty once unconquered, unvanquished, irresistible in war, that penetrated the ears and heart of the people, is now cast off.

26	φοβεῖται δέ τις.
But there is still fear.

27	τὸ δ’ εὐτυχεῖν, τόδ’ ἐν βροτοῖς θεός τε καὶ θεοῦ πλέον.
And prosperity—this, among mortals, is a god and more than a god.

28	ῥοπὴ δ’ ἐπισκοπεῖ δίκας ταχεῖα τοὺς μὲν ἐν φάει, τὰ δ’ ἐν μεταιχμίῳ σκότου μένει χρονίζοντας ἄχη βρύει, τοὺς δ’ ἄκραντος ἔχει νύξ.
But the balance of Justice keeps watch: swiftly it descends on those in the light; sometimes pain waits for those who linger on the frontier of twilight; and others are claimed by strengthless night.

29	δι’ αἵματ’ ἐκποθένθ’ ὑπὸ χθονὸς τροφοῦ τίτας φόνος πέπηγεν οὐ διαρρύδαν.
Because of blood drunk up by the fostering earth, the vengeful gore lies clotted and will not dissolve away.

30	διαλγὴς δ’ ἄτα διαφέρει τὸν αἴτιον παναρκέτας νόσου βρύειν.
Soul-racking calamity distracts the guilty man till he is steeped in utter misery.

31	θιγόντι δ’ οὔτι νυμφικῶν ἑδωλίων ἄκος, πόροι τε πάντες ἐκ μιᾶς ὁδοῦ προβαίνοντες τὸν χερομυσῆ φόνον καθαίροντες ἴθυσαν μάταν.
But for the violator of a bridal chamber there is no cure. And though all streams flow in one course to cleanse the blood from a polluted hand, they rush in vain.

32	ἐμοὶ δ’ — ἀνάγκαν γὰρ ἀμφίπτολιν θεοὶ προσήνεγκαν ·
For since the gods laid constraining doom about my city and led me from my father’s house to a slave’s lot,

33	&quot;ἐκ γὰρ οἴκων πατρῴων δούλιόν μ’ ἐσᾶγον αἶσαν’ — δίκαια καὶ μὴ δίκαια ἀρχὰς πρέπον βίᾳ φρενῶν αἰνέσαι πικρὸν στύγος κρατούσῃ.
it is fitting for me to govern my bitter hate, even against my will, and submit to the wishes of my masters, whether just or unjust.

34	δακρύω δ’ ὑφ’ εἱμάτων ματαίοισι δεσποτᾶν τύχαις, κρυφαίοις πένθεσιν παχνουμένη.
But I weep beneath my veil over the senseless fate of my lord, my heart chilled by secret grief.

35	δμωαὶ γυναῖκες, δωμάτων εὐθήμονες, ἐπεὶ πάρεστε τῆσδε προστροπῆς ἐμοὶ πομποί, γένεσθε τῶνδε σύμβουλοι πέρι ·
You handmaidens who set our house in order, since you are here as my attendants in this rite of supplication, give me your counsel on this:

36	τί φῶ χέουσα τάσδε κηδείους χοάς;
what should I say while I pour these offerings of sorrow?

37	πῶς εὔφρον’ εἴπω, πῶς κατεύξομαι πατρί;
How shall I find gracious words, how shall I entreat my father?

38	πότερα λέγουσα παρὰ φίλης φίλῳ φέρειν γυναικὸς ἀνδρί, τῆς ἐμῆς μητρὸς πάρα;
Shall I say that I bring these offerings to a loved husband from a loving wife—from my own mother?

39	τῶνδ’ οὐ πάρεστι θάρσος, οὐδ’ ἔχω τί φῶ, χέουσα τόνδε πέλανον ἐν τύμβῳ πατρός.
I do not have the assurance for that, nor do I know what I should say as I pour this libation onto my father’s tomb.

40	ἢ τοῦτο φάσκω τ- ἔπος, ὡς νόμος βροτοῖς, ἔσθλ’ ἀντιδοῦναι τοῖσι πέμπουσιν τάδε στέφη, δόσιν γε τῶν κακῶν ἐπαξίαν;
Or shall I speak the words that men are accustomed to use: To those who send these honors may he return benefits—a gift, indeed, to match their evil?

41	ἢ σῖγ’ ἀτίμως, ὥσπερ οὖν ἀπώλετο πατήρ, τάδ’ ἐκχέασα, γάποτον χύσιν, στείχω καθάρμαθ’ ὥς τις ἐκπέμψας πάλιν δικοῦσα τεῦχος ἀστρόφοισιν ὄμμασιν;
Or, in silence and dishonor, even as my father perished, shall I pour them out for the earth to drink and then retrace my steps, like one who carries refuse away from a rite, hurling the vessel from me with averted eyes?

42	τῆσδ’ ἐστὲ βουλῆς, ὦ φίλαι, μεταίτιαι ·
In this, my friends, be my fellow-counsellors.

43	κοινὸν γὰρ ἔχθος ἐν δόμοις νομίζομεν.
For we cherish a common hatred within our house.

44	μὴ κεύθετ’ ἔνδον καρδίας φόβῳ τινός.
Do not hide your counsel in your hearts in fear of anyone.

45	τὸ μόρσιμον γὰρ τόν τ’ ἐλεύθερον μένει καὶ τὸν πρὸς ἄλλης δεσποτούμενον χερός.
For the portion of fate awaits both the free man and the man enslaved by another’s hand.

46	λέγοις ἄν, εἴ τι τῶνδ’ ἔχοις ὑπέρτερον.
If you have a better course to urge, speak!

47	αἰδουμένη σοι βωμὸν ὡς τύμβον πατρὸς λέξω, κελεύεις γάρ, τὸν ἐκ φρενὸς λόγον.
In reverence for your father’s tomb, as if it were an altar, I will speak my thoughts from the heart, since you command me.

48	λέγοις ἄν, ὥσπερ ᾐδέσω τάφον πατρός.
Speak, even as you revere my father’s grave.

49	φθέγγου χέουσα κεδνὰ τοῖσιν εὔφροσιν.
Speak out while you pour these offerings, your words meaningful to the gracious.

50	τίνας δὲ τούτους τῶν φίλων προσεννέπω;
To which of these friends should I address them?

51	πρῶτον μὲν αὑτὴν κ- ὅστις Αἴγισθον στυγεῖ.
First to yourself, then to whoever hates Aegisthus.

52	ἐμοί τε καὶ σοί τ- ἄρ’ ἐπεύξομαι τάδε;
Then for myself and for you also shall I make this prayer?

53	αὐτὴ σὺ ταῦτα μανθάνουσ’ ἤδη φράσαι.
That is for you, using your judgment, to consider now for yourself.

54	τίν’ οὖν ἔτ’ ἄλλον τῇδε προστιθῶ στάσει;
Then whom else should I add to our company?

55	μέμνησ’ Ὀρέστου, κ- εἰ θυραῖός ἐσθ’ ὅμως.
Remember Orestes, though he is still away from home.

56	εὖ τοῦτο, κ- ἐφρένωσας οὐχ ἥκιστά με.
Well said! You have indeed admonished me thoughtfully.

57	τοῖς αἰτίοις νῦν τοῦ φόνου μεμνημένη — τί φῶ;
For the guilty murderers now, mindful of— What should I say?

58	δίδασκ’ ἄπειρον ἐξηγουμένη.
Instruct my inexperience, prescribe the form.

59	ἐλθεῖν τιν’ αὐτοῖς δαίμον’ ἢ βροτῶν τινα — πότερα δικαστὴν ἢ δικηφόρον λέγεις;
Pray that some divinity or some mortal may come to them— As judge or as avenger, do you mean?

60	ἅπλῶς τι φράζουσ’, ὅστις ἀνταποκτενεῖ.
Say in plain speech, One who will take life for life.

61	καὶ ταῦτά μ- ἐστιν εὐσεβῆ θεῶν πάρα;
And is it right for me to ask this of the gods?

62	πῶς δ’ οὐ τὸν ἐχθρὸν ἀνταμείβεσθαι κακοῖς;
How

could it not be right to repay an enemy with ills?

63	κῆρυξ μέγιστε τῶν ἄνω τε καὶ κάτω, ἄρηξον, Ἑρμῆ χθόνιε, κηρύξας ἐμοὶ τοὺς γῆς ἔνερθε δαίμονας κλύειν ἐμὰς εὐχάς, πατρῴων δωμάτων ἐπισκόπους, καὶ Γαῖαν αὐτήν, ἣ τὰ πάντα τίκτεται, θρέψασά τ’ αὖθις τῶνδε κῦμα λαμβάνει ·
Supreme herald of the realm above and the realm below, O Hermes of the nether world, come to my aid, summon to me the spirits beneath the earth to hear my prayers, spirits that watch over my father’s house, and Earth herself, who gives birth to all things, and having nurtured them receives their increase in turn.

64	κ- ἐγὼ χέουσα τάσδε χέρνιβας βροτοῖς λέγω καλοῦσα πατέρ’, ἐποίκτιρόν τ’ ἐμὲ φίλον τ’ Ὀρέστην ·
And meanwhile, as I pour these lustral offerings to the dead, I invoke my father: Have pity both on me and on dear Orestes!

65	πῶς ἀνάξομεν δόμοις;
How shall we rule our own house?

66	πεπραμένοι γὰρ νῦν γέ πως ἀλώμεθα πρὸς τῆς τεκούσης, ἄνδρα δ’ ἀντηλλάξατο Αἴγισθον, ὅσπερ

σοῦ φόνου μεταίτιος.
For now we are bartered away like vagrants by her who bore us, by her who in exchange got as her mate Aegisthus, who was her accomplice in your murder.

67	κ- ἐγὼ μὲν ἀντίδουλος ·
As for me, I am no better than a slave,

68	ἐκ δὲ χρημάτων φεύγων Ὀρέστης ἐστίν, οἱ δ’ ὑπερκόπως ἐν τοῖσι σοῖς πόνοισι χλίουσιν μέγα.
Orestes is an outcast from his inheritance, while they in their insolence revel openly in the winnings of your toil.

69	ἐλθεῖν δ’ Ὀρέστην δεῦρο σὺν τύχῃ τινὶ κατεύχομαί σοι, καὶ σὺ κλῦθί μου, πάτερ ·
But that Orestes may come home with good fortune I pray to you, father: Oh, hearken to me!

70	αὐτῇ τέ μοι δὸς σωφρονεστέραν πολὺ μητρὸς γενέσθαι χεῖρά τ’ εὐσεβεστέραν.
And as for myself, grant that I may prove far more circumspect than my mother and more reverent in deed.

71	ἡμῖν μὲν εὐχὰς τάσδε, τοῖς δ’ ἐναντίοις λέγω φανῆναί σου, πάτερ, τιμάορον, καὶ τοὺς κτανόντας ἀντικατθανεῖν δίκῃ.
I utter these prayers on our behalf, but I ask that your avenger appear to our foes, father, and that your killers may be killed in just retribution.

72	ταῦτ’ ἐν μέσῳ τίθημι τῆς καλῆς ἀρᾶς, κείνοις λέγουσα τήνδε τὴν κακὴν ἀράν.
So I interrupt my prayer for good to offer them this prayer for evil.

73	ἡμῖν δὲ πομπὸς ἴσθι τῶν ἐσθλῶν ἄνω, σὺν θεοῖσι καὶ γῇ καὶ δίκῃ νικηφόρῳ.
But be a bearer of blessings for us to the upper world, with the help of the gods and Earth and Justice crowned with victory.

74	τοιαῖσδ’ ἐπ’ εὐχαῖς τάσδ’ ἐπισπένδω χοάς.
Such are my prayers, and over them I pour out these libations.

75	ὑμᾶς δὲ κωκυτοῖς ἐπανθίζειν νόμος, παιᾶνα τοῦ θανόντος ἐξαυδωμένας.
It is right for you to crown them with lamentations, raising your voices in a chant for the dead.

76	ἵετε δάκρυ καναχὲς ὀλόμενον ὀλομένῳ δεσπότᾳ πρὸς ἔρυμα τόδε κακῶν, κεδνῶν τ’ ἀπότροπον ἄγος ἀπεύχετον κεχυμένων χοᾶν.
Pour forth your tears, splashing as they fall for our fallen lord, to accompany this protection against evil, this charm for the good against the loathsome pollution.

77	κλύε δέ μοι, κλύε, σέβας ὦ δέσποτ’, ἐξ ἀμαυρᾶς φρενός.
Hear me, oh hear me, my honored lord, out of the darkness of your spirit.

78	ὀτοτοτοτοτοτοτοῖ, ἴτω τις δορυσθενὴς ἀνήρ, ἀναλυτὴρ δόμων, Σκυθικά τ’ ἐν χεροῖν παλίντον’ ἐν ἔργῳ βέλη ’πιπάλλων Ἄρης σχέδιά τ’ αὐτόκωπα νωμῶν ξίφη.
Woe, woe, woe! Oh for a man mighty with the spear to deliver our house, an Ares, brandishing in the fight the springing Scythian bow and wielding his hilted sword in close combat.

79	ἔχει μὲν ἤδη γαπότους χοὰς πατήρ.
My father has by now received the libations, which the earth has drunk.

80	νέου δὲ μύθου τοῦδε κοινωνήσατε.
But take your share of this startling news.

81	λέγοις ἄν.
Speak—but my heart

is dancing with fear.

82	ὁρῶ τομαῖον τόνδε βόστρυχον τάφῳ.
I see here a lock cut as an offering for the tomb.

83	τίνος ποτ’ ἀνδρός, ἢ βαθυζώνου κόρης;
A man’s, or a deep-girt maid’s?

84	εὐξύμβολον τόδ’ ἐστὶ παντὶ δοξάσαι.
That is open to conjecture—anyone may guess.

85	πῶς οὖν;
How then?

86	παλαιὰ παρὰ νεωτέρας μάθω.
Let my age be taught by your youth.

87	οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις πλὴν ἐμοῦ κείραιτό νιν.
There is no one who could have cut it but myself.

88	ἐχθροὶ γὰρ οἷς προσῆκε πενθῆσαι τριχί.
Yes, for those who ought to have mourned with a lock of hair are enemies.

89	καὶ μὴν ὅδ’ ἐστὶ κάρτ’ ἰδεῖν ὁμόπτερος.
And further, in appearance it is very much like—

90	ποίαις ἐθείραις;
Whose lock? This is what I would like to know.

91	τοῦτο γὰρ θέλω μαθεῖν.
It is very much like my own in appearance.

92	αὐτοῖσιν ἡμῖν κάρτα προσφερὴς ἰδεῖν.
Then can this be a secret offering from Orestes?

93	μῶν οὖν Ὀρέστου κρύβδα δῶρον ἦν τόδε;
It is his curling locks that it most resembles.

94	μάλιστ’ ἐκείνου βοστρύχοις προσείδεται.
But how did he dare to come here?

95	καὶ πῶς ἐκεῖνος δεῦρ’ ἐτόλμησεν μολεῖν;
He has merely sent this cut lock to honor his father.

96	ἔπεμψε χαίτην κουρίμην χάριν πατρός.
What you say is no less a cause of tears for me, if he will never again set foot on this land.



97	οὐχ ἧσσον εὐδάκρυτά μοι λέγεις τάδε, εἰ τῆσδε χώρας μήποτε ψαύσει ποδί.
What you say is no less a cause of tears for me, if he will never again set foot on this land.

98 κ- ἐμοὶ προσέστη καρδίας κλυδώνιον χολῆς, ἐπαίσθην δ’ ὡς διανταίῳ βέλει ·
Over my heart, too, there sweeps a surge of bitterness, and I am struck as if a sword had run me through.

99 ἐξ ὀμμάτων δὲ δίψιοι πίπτουσί μοι σταγόνες ἄφρακτοι δυσχίμου πλημμυρίδος, πλόκαμον ἰδούσῃ τόνδε ·
From my eyes thirsty drops of a stormy flood fall unchecked at the sight of this tress.

100 πῶς γὰρ ἐλπίσω

ἀστῶν τιν’ ἄλλον τῆσδε δεσπόζειν φόβης;
For how can I expect to find that someone else, some townsman, owns this lock?

101 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ μήν νιν ἡ κτανοῦσ’ ἐκείρατο, ἐμὴ δὲ μήτηρ, οὐδαμῶς ἐπώνυμον φρόνημα παισὶ δύσθεον πεπαμένη.
Nor yet in truth did she clip it from her head, the murderess, my own mother, who has assumed a godless spirit regarding her children that ill accords with the name of mother.

102 ἐγὼ δ’ ὅπως μὲν ἄντικρυς τάδ’ αἰνέσω, εἶναι τόδ’ ἀγλάισμά μοι τοῦ φιλτάτου βροτῶν Ὀρέστου — σαίνομαι δ’ ὑπ’ ἐλπίδος.
But as for me, how am I to assent to this outright, that it adorned the head of Orestes, the dearest to me of all mortals? No, hope is merely flattering me.

103 φεῦ.
Ah, woe!

104 εἴθ’ εἶχε φωνὴν εὔφρον’ ἀγγέλου δίκην, ὅπως δίφροντις οὖσα μὴ ’κινυσσόμην, ἀλλ’ εὖ ’σαφήνει τόνδ’ ἀποπτύσαι πλόκον, εἴπερ γ’ ἀπ’ ἐχθροῦ κρατὸς ἦν τετμημένος, ἢ ξυγγενὴς ὢν εἶχε συμπενθεῖν ἐμοὶ ἄγαλμα τύμβου τοῦδε καὶ τιμὴν πατρός.
If only it had a kind voice, like a messenger, so I wouldn’t be so unsettled, and could clearly reject this tress if it were from an enemy, or if a kinsman’s, acknowledge it shared my grief, an adornment for this tomb and a tribute to my father.

105	ἀλλ’ εἰδότας μὲν τοὺς θεοὺς καλούμεθα, οἵοισιν ἐν χειμῶσι ναυτίλων δίκην στροβούμεθ’.
But we call upon the gods, who know, as we are tossed like sailors in storms.

106	εἰ δὲ χρὴ τυχεῖν σωτηρίας, σμικροῦ γένοιτ’ ἂν σπέρματος μέγας πυθμήν.
Yet if we are to achieve salvation, a great foundation may come from a small seed.

107	καὶ μὴν στίβοι γε, δεύτερον τεκμήριον, ποδῶν ὅμοιοι τοῖς τ’ ἐμοῖσιν ἐμφερεῖς—καὶ γὰρ δύ’ ἐστὸν τώδε περιγραφὰ ποδοῖν, αὐτοῦ τ’ ἐκείνου καὶ συνεμπόρου τινός.
And look! Another proof! Footprints matching each other—and like my own! Yes, here are the outlines of two sets of feet, his own and some companion’s.

108	πτέρναι τενόντων θ’ ὑπογραφαὶ μετρούμεναι εἰς τ- αὐτὸ συμβαίνουσι τοῖς ἐμοῖς στίβοις.
The heels and the imprints of the tendons agree in proportion with my own tracks.

109	πάρεστι δ’ ὠδὶς καὶ φρενῶν καταφθορά.
I am in torment, my brain is in a whirl!

110	εὔχου τὰ λοιπά, τοῖς θεοῖς τελεσφόρους εὐχὰς ἐπαγγέλλουσα, τυγχάνειν καλῶς.
Pray for the rest, promising the gods prayers of fulfillment, that all may turn out well.

111	ἐπεὶ τί νῦν ἕκατι δαιμόνων κυρῶ;
For what now do I really control among the wills of the gods?

112	εἰς ὄψιν ἥκεις ὧνπερ ἐξηύχου πάλαι.
You have come into the sight of what you have long prayed for.

113	καὶ τίνα σύνοισθά μοι καλουμένῃ βροτῶν;
And whom do you acknowledge when I call upon the mortals?

114	σύνοιδ’ Ὀρέστην πολλά σ’ ἐκπαγλουμένην.
I know you long for Orestes with great astonishment.

115	καὶ πρὸς τί δῆτα τυγχάνω κατευγμάτων;
Then why do I find myself in the midst of such wonders?

116	ὅδ’ εἰμί.
Here I am.

117	μὴ μάτευ’ ἐμοῦ μᾶλλον φίλον.
Do not seek anyone more friendly than me.

118	ἀλλ’ ἦ δόλον τιν’ , ὦ ξέν’ , ἀμφί μοι πλέκεις ;
But surely, stranger, you are weaving some snare about me?

119	αὐτὸς καθ’ αὑτοῦ τ- ἄρα μηχανορραφῶ.
Then I am devising plots against myself.

120	ἀλλ’ ἐν κακοῖσι τοῖς ἐμοῖς γελᾶν θέλεις.
No, you wish to mock my distress.

121	κ- ἐν τοῖς ἐμοῖς ἄρ’ , εἴπερ ἔν γε τοῖσι σοῖς ὡς ὄντ’ Ὀρέστην τάδε σ’ ἐγὼ προσεννέπω;
And in my distress, if in yours as well, am I to address you as Orestes indeed?

122	αὐτὸν μὲν οὖν ὁρῶσα δυσμαθεῖς ἐμέ.
Seeing him in front of you, you fail to recognize me.

123	κουρὰν δ’ ἰδοῦσα τήνδε κηδείου τριχὸς ἰχνοσκοποῦσά τ’ ἐν στίβοισι τοῖς ἐμοῖς ἀνεπτερώθης κ- ἐδόκεις ὁρᾶν ἐμέ.
But seeing this mourning lock of hair and examining the footprints in my tracks, you were uplifted and thought you saw me.

124	σκέψαι τομῇ προσθεῖσα βόστρυχον τριχὸς σαυτῆς ἀδελφοῦ σύμμετρον τ- ἐμῷ κάρᾳ.
Consider, adding the cut hair to your own, the brother's lock matches my head.

125	ἰδοῦ δ’ ὕφασμα τοῦτο, σῆς ἔργον χερός, σπάθης τε πληγὰς ἠδὲ θήρειον γραφήν.
Look at this fabric, the work of your hands, the strokes of the batten and the picture of the animal.

126	ἔνδον γενοῦ, χαρᾷ δὲ μὴ ’κπλαγῇς φρένας.
Be assured, and do not let joy overwhelm your senses.

127	τοὺς φιλτάτους γὰρ οἶδα νῷν ὄντας πικρούς.
For I know our dearest ones are bitter foes to us both.

128	Orestes: Ὁρῶ τομαῖον τόνδε βόστρυχον τάφῳ.
I see here a lock cut as an offering for the tomb.

129	Electra: Τίνος ποτ’ ἀνδρός, ἢ βαθυζώνου κόρης;
A man’s, or a deep-girt maid’s?

130	Orestes: Εὐξύμβολον τόδ’ ἐστὶ παντὶ δοξάσαι.
That is open to conjecture—anyone may guess.

131	Electra: Πῶς οὖν;
How then?

132	Orestes: Παλαιὰ παρὰ νεωτέρας μάθω.
Let my age be taught by your youth.

133	Electra: Οὐκ ἔστιν ὅστις πλὴν ἐμοῦ κείραιτό νιν.
There is no one who could have cut it but myself.

134	Orestes: Ἐχθροὶ γὰρ οἷς προσῆκε πενθῆσαι τριχί.
Yes, for those who ought to have mourned with a lock of hair are enemies.

135	Electra: Καὶ μὴν ὅδ’ ἐστὶ κάρτ’ ἰδεῖν ὁμόπτερος.
And further, in appearance it is very much like—

136	Orestes: Ποίαις ἐθείραις;
Whose lock? This is what I would like to know.

137	Electra: Τοῦτο γὰρ θέλω μαθεῖν.
It is very much like my own in appearance.

138	Orestes: Αὐτοῖσιν ἡμῖν κάρτα προσφερὴς ἰδεῖν.
Then can this be a secret offering from Orestes?

139	Electra: Μῶν οὖν Ὀρέστου κρύβδα δῶρον ἦν τόδε;
It is his curling locks that it most resembles.

140	Orestes: Μάλιστ’ ἐκείνου βοστρύχοις προσείδεται.
But how did he dare to come here?

141	Electra: Ἔπεμψε χαίτην κουρίμην χάριν πατρός.
He has merely sent this cut lock to honor his father.

142	Orestes: Οὐχ ἧσσον εὐδάκρυτά μοι λέγεις τάδε, εἰ τῆσδε χώρας μήποτε ψαύσει ποδί.
What you say is no less a cause of tears for me, if he will never again set foot on this land.

143	κόμιζ', ἀπὸ σμικροῦ δ' ἂν ἄρειας μέγαν δόμον, δοκοῦντα κάρτα νῦν πεπτωκέναι.
Nurture it, and from a small seed, you may raise a great house, now seeming utterly fallen.

144	ὦ παῖδες, ὦ σωτῆρες ἑστίας πατρός, σιγᾶθ', ὅπως μὴ πεύσεταί τις, ὦ τέκνα, γλώσσης χάριν δὲ πάντ' ἀπαγγείλῃ τάδε πρὸς τοὺς κρατοῦντας;
O children, saviors of your father's hearth, be silent, lest someone hears and reports all this to those in power.

145	οὓς ἴδοιμ' ἐγώ ποτε θανόντας ἐν κηκῖδι πισσήρει φλογός.
May I someday see them dead in the ooze of flaming pitch

146	οὔτοι προδώσει Λοξίου μεγασθενὴς χρησμὸς κελεύων τόνδε κίνδυνον περᾶν, κ- ἐξορθιάζων πολλὰ καὶ δυσχειμέρους ἄτας ὑφ’ ἧπαρ θερμὸν ἐξαυδώμενος, εἰ μὴ μέτειμι τοῦ πατρὸς τοὺς αἰτίους.
Surely the powerful oracle of Loxias will not betray me, commanding me to undergo this peril and loudly proclaiming many harsh miseries that press upon my warm heart, if I do not avenge my father's death.

147	τρόπον τὸν αὐτὸν ἀνταποκτεῖναι λέγων, ἀποχρημάτοισι ζημίαις ταυρούμενον.
He speaks of exacting revenge in the same way, suffering the penalty with a fitting retribution.

148	αὐτὸν δ’ ἔφασκε τῇ φίλῃ ψυχῇ τάδε τείσειν μ’ ἔχοντα πολλὰ δυστερπῆ κακά.
He declared that I myself must pay these things with my dear life, enduring many unbearable evils.

149	τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ γῆς δυσφρόνων μηνίματα βροτοῖς πιφαύσκων εἶπε, τὰς δ’ αἰνῶν νόσους, σαρκῶν ἐπαμβατῆρας ἀγρίαις γνάθοις λειχῆνας ἐξέσθοντας

 ἀρχαίαν φύσιν.
For he foretold of wrathful spirits from beneath the earth bringing woes to mortals, and of terrible diseases, savage with fangs, gnawing at the flesh and consuming its original nature.

150	λευκὰς δὲ κόρσας τῇδ’ ἐπαντέλλειν νόσῳ.
He said that a white down would sprout up due to this illness.

151	ἄλλας τ’ ἐφώνει προσβολὰς Ἐρινύων ἐκ τῶν πατρῴων αἱμάτων τελουμένας.
And he spoke of other assaults of the Furies, brought to pass from the blood of my father.

152	τὸ γὰρ σκοτεινὸν τῶν ἐνερτέρων βέλος ἐκ προστροπαίων ἐν γένει πεπτωκότων, καὶ λύσσα καὶ μάταιος ἐκ νυκτῶν φόβος ὁρῶντα λαμπρὸν ἐν σκότῳ νωμῶντ’ ὀφρὺν κινεῖ, ταράσσει, καὶ διώκεσθαι πόλεως χαλκηλάτῳ πλάστιγγι λυμανθὲν δέμας.
For the dark bolt from those below, fallen on a kindred race, brings madness and groundless fear from the night, causing a man to see brightness in the dark and move his brow, torments him, and drives him in exile from the city with his body marred by the brazen whip.

153	καὶ τοῖς τοιούτοις οὔτε κρατῆρος μέρος εἶναι μετασχεῖν, οὐ φιλοσπόνδου λιβός, βωμῶν τ’ ἀπείργειν οὐχ ὁρωμένην πατρὸς μῆνιν ·
And for those who suffer such fates, it is not permitted to partake in the cup of the feast or in friendly libations, nor to approach the altars, not recognizing a father's wrath.

154	δέχεσθαι δ’ οὔτε συλλύειν τινά.
Nor is it allowed for them to receive or to take refuge with anyone.

155	πάντων δ’ ἄτιμον κ- ἄφιλον θνῄσκειν χρόνῳ κακῶς ταριχευθέντα παμφθάρτῳ μόρῳ.
And they shall die dishonored and unloved, over time suffering a death that corrupts utterly.

156	τοιοῖσδε χρησμοῖς ἆρα χρὴ πεποιθέναι;
Should one then trust in such oracles?

157	κ- εἰ μὴ πέποιθα, τ- ἔργον ἔστ’ ἐργαστέον.
And even if not trusting, the deed must still be done.

158	πολλοὶ γὰρ εἰς ἓν συμπίτνουσιν ἵμεροι, θεοῦ τ’ ἐφετμαὶ καὶ πατρὸς πένθος μέγα, καὶ πρὸς πιέζει χρημάτων ἀχηνία, τὸ μὴ πολίτας εὐκλεεστάτους βροτῶν, Τροίας ἀναστατῆρας εὐδόξῳ φρενί, δυοῖν γυναικοῖν ὧδ’ ὑπηκόους πέλειν.
For many desires converge into one: the god's commands, great sorrow for my father, and the pressing pain of poverty, not to let the most renowned of men, the conquerors of Troy with glorious mind, be subjected so to a pair of women.

159	Θήλεια γὰρ φρήν.
For he has a woman’s mind.

160	Εἰ δὲ μή, τάχ’ εἴσεται.
Or if not, it will soon be found out.

161	Ἀλλ’ ὦ μεγάλαι Μοῖραι, Διόθεν τῇδε τελευτᾶν, τὸ δίκαιον μεταβαίνει.
But you mighty Fates, through the power of Zeus grant fulfilment in the way to which Justice now turns.

162	Ἀντὶ μὲν ἐχθρᾶς γλώσσης ἐχθρὰ γλῶσσα τ

ελείσθω.
For a word of hate, let a word of hate be said.

163	Τὸ ὀφειλόμενον πράσσουσα Δίκη μέγ’ αὐτεῖ.
Justice cries out as she exacts the debt.

164	Ἀντὶ δὲ πληγῆς φονίας φονίαν πληγὴν τινέτω.
And for a murderous stroke, let a murderous stroke be paid.

165	Δράσαντι παθεῖν, τριγέρων μῦθος τάδε φωνεῖ.
"Let it be done to him as he does," says the age-old wisdom.

166	Ὦ πάτερ αἰνόπατερ, τί σοι φάμενος ἢ τί ῥέξας τύχοιμ’ ἂν ἕκαθεν οὐρίσας, ἔνθα σ’ ἔχουσιν εὐναί, σκότῳ φάος ἀντίμοιρον;
O father, unhappy father, by what word or deed of mine can I succeed in sailing from far away to you, where your resting-place holds you, a light to oppose your darkness?

167	Χάριτες δ’ ὁμοίως κέκληνται γόος εὐκλεὴς προσθοδόμοις Ἀτρείδαις.
Yet a lament in honor of the Atreidae who once possessed our house is

 none the less a joyous service.

168	Τέκνον, φρόνημα τοῦ θανόντος οὐ δαμάζει πυρὸς ἡ μαλερὰ γνάθος, φαίνει δ’ ὕστερον ὀργάς.
My child, the fire’s ravening jaw does not overwhelm the wits of the dead man, but afterwards he reveals what stirs him.

169	Ὀτοτύζεται δ’ ὁ θνῄσκων, ἀναφαίνεται δ’ ὁ βλάπτων.
The murdered man has his dirge; the guilty man is revealed.

170	Πατέρων τε καὶ τεκόντων γόος ἔνδικος ματεύει τὸ πᾶν ἀμφιλαφής ταραχθείς.
Justified lament for fathers and for parents, when raised loud and strong, makes its search everywhere.

171	Κλῦθί νυν, ὦ πάτερ, ἐν μέρει πολυδάκρυτα πένθη.
Hear then, O father, as in turn we mourn with plentiful tears.

172	Δίπαις τοί σ’ ἐπιτύμβιος θρῆνος ἀναστενάζει.
Look, your two children mourn you in a dirge over your tomb.

173	Τάφος δ’ ἱκέτας δέδεκται φυγάδας θ’ ὁμοίως.
As suppliants and exiles as well they have sought a haven at your sepulchre.

174	Τί τῶνδ’ εὖ, τί δ’ ἄτερ κακῶν;
What of these things is good, what free of evil?

175	Οὐκ ἀτρίακτος ἄτα;
Is it not hopeless to wrestle against doom?

176	ἀλλ’ ἔτ’ ἂν ἐκ τῶνδε θεὸς χρῄζων θείη κελάδους εὐφθογγοτέρους ·
Yet still, a god, if willing, might turn our cries to sweeter sounds from these sorrows.

177	ἀντὶ δὲ θρήνων ἐπιτυμβιδίων παιὰν μελάθροις ἐν βασιλείοις νεοκρᾶτα φίλον κομίσειεν.
Instead of dirges over a tomb, a new-found friend might be welcomed with a paean in the royal halls.

178	εἰ γὰρ ὑπ’ Ἰλίῳ πρός τινος Λυκίων, πάτερ, δορίτμητος κατηναρίσθης;
For had you been slain under Ilium by some Lycian's spear, father,

179	λιπὼν ἂν εὔκλειαν ἐν δόμοισι τέκνων τ’ ἐν κελεύθοις ἐπιστρεπτὸν αἰῶ κτίσας πολύχωστον ἂν εἶχες τάφον διαποντίου γᾶς δώμασιν εὐφόρητον,
you would have left a legacy of glory in your children's homes and on the paths of life, and would have had a tomb laden with earth, easily borne by your distant land.

180	φίλος φίλοισι τοῖς ἐκεῖ καλῶς θανοῦσιν κατὰ χθονὸς ἐμπρέπων σεμνότιμος ἀνάκτωρ, πρόπολός τε τῶν μεγίστων χθονίων ἐκεῖ τυράννων ·
Honored among friends who died nobly there, distinguished and venerable beneath the earth, serving as minister to the greatest chthonic rulers there.

181	βασιλεὺς γὰρ ἦσθ’, ὄφρ’ ἔζης, μόριμον λάχος πιπλάντων χεροῖν πεισίβροτόν τε βάκτρον.
For you were a king in life, holding the mortal lot in your hands and wielding the staff that men obey.

182	μηδ’ ὑπὸ Τρωίας τείχεσι φθίμενος, πάτερ, μετ’ ἄλλῳ δουρικμῆτι λαῷ παρὰ Σκαμάνδρου πόρον τεθάφθαι.
Nor would I wish you to have perished beneath the walls of Troy, father, entombed by the Scamander's stream among others slain by the spear.

183	πάρος δ’ οἱ κτανόντες νιν οὕτως δαμῆναι φίλοις, θανατηφόρον αἶσαν πρόσω τινὰ πυνθάνεσθαι τῶνδε πόνων ἄπειρον.
Rather, I would have his murderers meet such a fate at the hands of their loved ones, so that someone far away, unknowing of these troubles, might learn of their death-bringing destiny.

184 ἀλλ’ ὦ ξένοι, καὶ στρατὸς ἐνθάδε νῦν ἐστιν;
But strangers, is there an army here now?

185 ἢ ποῖος ἄνδρα τόνδε τῶν συμμάχων πεφύκει;
Or what sort of man is he among the allies?

186 ταῦτα μέν, ὦ παῖ, κρείσσονα χρυσοῦ, μεγάλης δὲ τύχης καὶ ὑπερβορέου μείζονα φωνεῖς;
These things, my child, you speak of are better than gold, greater than great fortune and more than the North Wind's might.

187 δύνασαι γάρ.
For you can indeed achieve it.

188 ἀλλὰ διπλῆς γὰρ τῆσδε μαράγνης δοῦπος ἱκνεῖται;
But the echo of this double scourge reaches us.

189 τῶν μὲν ἀρωγοὶ κατὰ γῆς ἤδη, τῶν δὲ κρατούντων χέρες οὐχ ὅσιαι στυγερῶν τούτων;
For already we have helpers beneath the earth, and the hands of those who rule are unholy because of these hateful deeds.

190 παισὶ δὲ μᾶλλον γεγένηται.
And it has turned out more favorable for the children.

191 τοῦτο διαμπερὲς οὖς ἵκεθ’ ἅπερ τι βέλος.
This has pierced through to the ear, as if it were an arrow.

192 Ζεῦ Ζεῦ, κάτωθεν ἀμπέμπων ὑστερόποινον ἄταν βροτῶν τλάμονι καὶ πανούργῳ χειρὶ — τοκεῦσι δ’ ὅμως τελεῖται.
O Zeus, O Zeus, sending from below a late-avenging doom upon the wretched and cunning hand of mortals — yet for the sake of our parents, it will be fulfilled.

193 ἐφυμνῆσαι γένοιτό μοι πυκάεντ’ ὀλολυγμὸν ἀνδρὸς θεινομένου, γυναικός τ’ ὀλλυμένας.
May I be able to raise a dense outcry over the man being struck and the woman perishing.


194 καί πότ’ ἂν ἀμφιθαλὴς Ζεὺς ἐπὶ χεῖρα βάλοι, φεῦ φεῦ, κάρανα δαΐξας;
And when might mighty Zeus strike with his hand, ah, woe, splitting their heads?

195 πιστὰ γένοιτο χώρᾳ.
May it prove true for the land.

196 δίκαν δ’ ἐξ ἀδίκων ἀπαιτῶ.
I demand justice from the unjust.

197 κλῦτε δὲ Γᾶ χθονίων τε τιμαί.
Hear, O Earth and powers of the underworld.

198 ἀλλὰ νόμος μὲν φονίας σταγόνας χυμένας ἐς πέδον ἄλλο προσαιτεῖν αἷμα.
But the law dictates that drops of blood spilled on the ground call for more blood.

199 βοᾷ γὰρ λοιγὸς Ἐρινὺν παρὰ τῶν πρότερον φθιμένων ἄτην ἑτέραν ἐπάγουσαν ἐπ’ ἄτῃ.
For the curse invokes the Fury, bringing further ruin upon ruin from those previously perished.

200	πόποι δὴ νερτέρων τυραννίδες, ἴδετε πολυκρατεῖς Ἀραὶ φθινομένων, ἴδεσθ’ Ἀτρειδᾶν τὰ λοίπ’ ἀμηχάνως ἔχοντα καὶ δωμάτων ἄτιμα.
Alas, you sovereign powers of the world below, behold, you potent Curses of the slain, behold the remnants of the line of Atreus in their helpless plight, cast out from house and home in dishonor.

201	πᾷ τις τράποιτ’ ἄν, ὦ Ζεῦ;
Which way can we turn, O Zeus?

202	πέπαλται δέ αὖτε μοι φίλον κέαρ τόνδε κλύουσαν οἶκτον καὶ τότε μὲν δύσελπις, σπλάγχνα δέ μοι κελαινοῦται πρὸς ἔπος κλυούσᾳ.
But again my heart throbs as I hear this pitiful lament. At once I am devoid of hope, and my viscera are darkened at the words I hear.

203	ὅταν δ’ αὖτ’ ἐπ’ ἀλκῆς ἐπάρῃ μ’ ἐλπὶς, ἀπέστασεν ἄχος προσφανεῖσά μοι καλῶς.
But when hope once again lifts and strengthens me, it puts away my distress and dawns brightly on me.

204	τί δ’ ἂν φάντες τύχοιμεν ἢ τά περ πάθομεν ἄχεα πρός γε τῶν τεκομένων;
To what could we more fittingly appeal than to those very miseries we have endured from the woman herself who bore us?

205	πάρεστι σαίνειν, τὰ δ’ οὔτι θέλγεται.
She may fawn upon us, but they are past all soothing.

206	λύκος γὰρ ὥστ’ ὠμόφρων ἄσαντος ἐκ ματρός ἐστι θυμός.
For like a fierce-hearted wolf, the temper we have acquired from our mother is implacable.

207	ἔκοψα κομμὸν Ἄριον ἔν τε Κισσίας νόμοις ἰηλεμιστρίας, ἀπριγδόπληκτα πολυπλάνητα δ’ ἦν ἰδεῖν ἐπασσυτεροτριβῆ τὰ χερὸς ὀρέγματα

ἄνωθεν ἀνέκαθεν, κτύπῳ δ’ ἐπερρόθει κροτητὸν ἀμὸν καὶ πανάθλιον κάρα.
On my breast, I beat a dirge, just like a Cissian wailing woman. It was a sight to see, how, with clenched fists, my hands descended again and again, striking my miserable and ill-fated head.

208	ἰὼ ἰὼ δαΐα πάντολμε μᾶτερ, δαΐαις ἐν ἐκφοραῖς ἄνευ πολιτᾶν ἄνακτ’, ἄνευ δὲ πενθημάτων ἔτλας ἀνοίμωκτον ἄνδρα θάψαι.
Alas, alas, audacious mother, in cruel rites, you dared to bury a king without citizens, without lamentations, an unwept man.

209	τὸ πᾶν ἀτίμως ἔλεξας, οἴμοι.
You have spoken everything disgracefully, alas!

210	πατρὸς δ’ ἀτίμωσιν ἆρα τείσει ἕκατι μὲν δαιμόνων, ἕκατι δ’ ἀμᾶν χερῶν;
Shall then the dishonor of our father be avenged, partly by the gods, partly by our own hands?

211	ἔπειτ’ ἐγὼ νοσφίσας ὀλοίμαν.
Then I, having avenged him, may I die.

212	ἐμασχαλίσθη δέ γ’, ὡς τόδ’ εἰδῇς.
He was horribly mutilated, as you well know.

213	ἔπρασσε δ’, ᾇπέρ νιν ὧδε θάπτει, μόρον κτίσαι μωμένα ἄφερτον αἰῶνι σῷ.
And even as she buried him in this way, she acted with intent to make the manner of his death a burden on your life past all power to bear.

214	κλύεις πατρῴους δύας ἀτίμους.
You hear the story of the ignominious outrage done to your father.

215	λέγεις πατρῷον μόρον;
My father was murdered just as you say.

216	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀπεστάτουν ἄτιμος, οὐδὲν ἀξία;
But all the while I was kept sequestered, despised, accounted a worthless thing.

217	μυχῷ δ’ ἄφερκτος πολυσινοῦς κυνὸς δίκαν ἑτοιμότερα γέλωτος ἀνέφερον λίβη, χέουσα πολύδακρυν γόον κεκρυμμένα.
Kennelled in my room as if I were a vicious cur, I gave free vent to my streaming tears, which came more readily than laughter, as in my concealment I poured out my lament in plentiful weeping.

218	τοιαῦτ’ ἀκούων ἐν φρεσὶν γράφου.
Hear my tale and inscribe it on your heart.

219	δι’ ὤτων δὲ συντέτραινε μῦθον ἡσύχῳ φρενῶν βάσει.
Yes, let it sink deep into your ears, but keep inside a quiet steadfastness of soul. 

220	τὰ μὲν γὰρ οὕτως ἔχει, τὰ δ’ αὐτὸς ὄργα μαθεῖν.
So far things are so. But you yourself be eager to resolve what is to follow.

221	πρέπει δ’ ἀκάμπτῳ μένει καθήκειν.
You must enter the contest with inflexible wrath.

222	σὲ τοι λέγω, ξυγγενοῦ, πάτερ, φίλοις.
Father, I call on you; side with your loved ones!

223	ἐγὼ δ’ ἐπιφθέγγομαι κεκλαυμένα.
And I in tears join my voice to his.

224	στάσις δὲ πάγκοινος ἅδ’ ἐπιρροθεῖ.
And let all our company blend our voices to echo the prayer.

225	ἄκουσον ἐς φάος μολών, ξὺν δὲ γενοῦ πρὸς ἐχθρούς.
Hear! Come to the light! Side with us against the foe!

226	Ἄρης Ἄρει ξυμβαλεῖ, Δίκᾳ Δίκα.
Ares will encounter Ares; Right will encounter Right.

213	ἔπρασσε δ’ , ᾇπέρ νιν ὧδε θάπτει , μόρον κτίσαι μωμένα ἄφερτον αἰῶνι σῷ .
And even as she buried him in this way, she acted with intent to make the manner of his death a burden on your life past all power to bear.

214	κλύεις πατρῴους δύας ἀτίμους .
You hear the story of the ignominious outrage done to your father.

215	λέγεις πατρῷον μόρον ·
My father was murdered just as you say.

216	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀπεστάτουν ἄτιμος , οὐδὲν ἀξία ·
But all the while I was kept sequestered, despised, accounted a worthless thing.

217	μυχῷ δ’ ἄφερκτος πολυσινοῦς κυνὸς δίκαν ἑτοιμότερα γέλωτος ἀνέφερον λίβη , χέουσα πολύδακρυν γόον κεκρυμμένα .
Kennelled in my room as if I were a vicious cur, I gave free vent to my streaming tears, which came more readily than laughter, as in my concealment I poured out my lament in plentiful weeping.

218	τοιαῦτ’ ἀκούων ἐν φρεσὶν γράφου ⏑– .
Hear my tale and inscribe it on your heart.

219	δι’ ὤτων δὲ συντέτραινε μῦθον ἡσύχῳ φρενῶν βάσει .
Yes, let it sink deep into your ears, but keep inside a quiet steadfastness of soul.

220	τὰ μὲν γὰρ οὕτως ἔχει , τὰ δ’ αὐτὸς ὄργα μαθεῖν .
So far things are so. But you yourself be eager to resolve what is to follow.

221	πρέπει δ’ ἀκάμπτῳ μένει καθήκειν .
You must enter the contest with inflexible wrath.

222	σὲ τοι λέγω , ξυγγενοῦ , πάτερ , φίλοις .
Father, I call on you; side with your loved ones!

223	ἐγὼ δ’ ἐπιφθέγγομαι κεκλαυμένα .
And I in tears join my voice to his.

224	στάσις δὲ πάγκοινος ἅδ’ ἐπιρροθεῖ ·
And let all our company blend our voices to echo the prayer.

225	ἄκουσον ἐς φάος μολών , ξὺν δὲ γενοῦ πρὸς ἐχθρούς .
Hear! Come to the light! Side with us against the foe!

226	Ἄρης Ἄρει ξυμβαλεῖ , Δίκᾳ Δίκα .
Ares will encounter Ares; Right will encounter Right.

227	ἰὼ θεοί , κραίνετ’ ἐνδίκως δίκας .
O you gods, judge rightly the plea of right!

228	τρόμος μ’ ὑφέρπει κλύουσαν εὐγμάτων .
A shudder steals over me as I hear these prayers.

229	τὸ μόρσιμον μένει πάλαι , εὐχομένοις δ’ ἂν ἔλθοι .
Doom has long been waiting, but it will come in answer to those who pray.

230	ὦ πόνος ἐγγενὴς καὶ παράμουσος Ἄτας αἱματόεσσα πλαγά .
Ah, inbred trouble and bloody stroke of ruin striking a discord!

231	ἰὼ δύστον’ ἄφερτα κήδη ·
Ah, lamentable and grievous sorrows!

232	ἰὼ δυσκατάπαυστον ἄλγος .
Ah, the unstaunched pain!

233	δώμασιν ἔμμοτον τῶνδ’ ἄκος , οὐδ’ ἀπ’ ἄλλων ἔκτοθεν , ἀλλ’ ἀπ’ αὐτῶν , δι’ ὠμὰν ἔριν αἱματηράν .
Our house has a cure to heal these woes, a cure not from outside, from the hands of others, but from itself, by fierce, bloody strife.

234	θεῶν τῶν κατὰ γᾶς ὅδ’ ὕμνος .
This hymn is for the gods beneath the earth.

235	ἀλλὰ κλύοντες , μάκαρες χθόνιοι , τῆσδε κατευχῆς πέμπετ’ ἀρωγὴν παισὶν προφρόνως ἐπὶ νίκῃ .
O you blessed powers below, hear this supplication of ours, and with a favorable will send forth to these children your aid for victory!

236	πάτερ , τρόποισιν οὐ τυραννικοῖς θανών , αἰτουμένῳ μοι δὸς κράτος τῶν σῶν δόμων .
O father, who perished by a death unbefitting a king, grant in answer to my prayer the lordship over your halls!

237	κ- ἐγώ , πάτερ , τοιάνδε σου χρείαν ἔχω , φυγεῖν μέγαν προσθεῖσαν Αἰγίσθῳ φθόρον .
And I too, father, have a like request of you: to escape when I have wrought great destruction on

Aegisthus.

238	οὕτω γὰρ ἄν σοι δαῖτες ἔννομοι βροτῶν κτιζοίατ’ ·
Yes, for then the customary funeral feasts of men would be established in your honor.

239	εἰ δὲ μή , παρ’ εὐδείπνοις ἔσῃ ἄτιμος ἐμπύροισι κνισωτοῖς χθονός .
But otherwise, at the rich and savory banquet of burnt offerings made to the earth, you will be without a portion of honor.

240	κ- ἐγὼ χοάς σοι τῆς ἐμῆς παγκληρίας οἴσω πατρῴων ἐκ δόμων γαμηλίους ·
And I will likewise at my wedding offer libations to you out of the fullness of my inheritance from my father’s house,

241	πάντων δὲ πρῶτον τόνδε πρεσβεύσω τάφον .
and before all else I will hold this tomb of yours in the highest honor.

242	ὦ Γαῖ’ , ἄνες μοι πατέρ’ ἐποπτεῦσαι μάχην .
O Earth, send up my father to watch my battle!

243	ὦ Περσέφασσα , δὸς δ’ ἔτ’ εὔμορφον κράτος .
O Persephone, grant us indeed a glorious victory!

244	μέμνησο λουτρῶν οἷς ἐνοσφίσθης , πάτερ .
Father, remember the bath where you were robbed of life.

245	μέμνησο δ’ ἀμφίβληστρον ὡς ἐκαίνισαν .
And remember how they devised a strange net to cast about you.

246	πέδαις δ’ ἀχαλκεύτοις ἐθηρεύθης , πάτερ .
You were caught, my father, in fetters forged by no smith’s hand.

247	αἰσχρῶς τε βουλευτοῖσιν ἐν καλύμμασιν .
And in a fabric shamefully devised.

248	ἆρ’ ἐξεγείρῃ τοῖσδ’ ὀνείδεσιν , πάτερ ;
Father, are you not roused by taunts such as these?

249	ἆρ’ ὀρθὸν αἴρεις φίλτατον τὸ σὸν κάρα ;
Are you not raising that dearest head of yours?

250	ἤτοι δίκην ἴαλλε σύμμαχον φίλοις , ἢ τὰς ὁμοίας ἀντίδος λαβὰς λαβεῖν , εἴπερ κρατηθείς γ’ ἀντινικῆσαι θέλεις .
Either send Justice to battle for those dear to you, or grant us in turn to get a similar grip on them, if indeed after defeat you would in turn win victory.

251	καὶ τῆσδ’ ἄκουσον λοισθίου βοῆς , πάτερ , ἰδὼν νεοσσοὺς τούσδ’ ἐφημένους τάφῳ ·
So listen, father, to this last appeal of mine as you behold these fledglings crouching at your tomb.

252	οἴκτιρε θῆλυν ἄρσενός θ’ ὁμοῦ γόνον , καὶ μὴ ’ξαλείψῃς σπέρμα Πελοπιδῶν τόδε ο

ὕτω γὰρ οὐ τέθνηκας οὐδὲ περ θανών ·
For then, in spite of death, you are not dead.

253	παῖδες γὰρ ἀνδρὶ κληδόνες σωτήριοι θανόντι ·
For children are voices of salvation to a man, though he is dead.

254	φελλοὶ δ’ ὣς ἄγουσι δίκτυον , τὸν ἐκ βυθοῦ κλωστῆρα σῴζοντες λίνου ·
Like corks, they buoy up the net, saving the flaxen cord from out of the deep.

255	ἄκου’ , ὑπὲρ σοῦ τοιάδ’ ἔστ’ ὀδύρματα ·
Hear! For your own sake we make this lament.

256	αὐτὸς δὲ σῴζῃ τόνδε τιμήσας λόγον ·
By honoring this plea of ours you save yourself.

257	καὶ μὴν ἀμεμφῆ τόνδ’ ἐτείνατον λόγον , τίμημα τύμβου τῆς ἀνοιμώκτου τύχης ·
In truth you have drawn out this plea of yours to your own content in showing honor to this unlamented tomb.

258	τὰ δ’ ἄλλ’ , ἐπειδὴ δρᾶν κατώρθωσαι φρενί , ἔρδοις ἂν ἤδη δαίμονος πειρώμενος ·
As for the rest, since your heart is rightly set on action, put your fortune to the test and get to your work at once.

259	ἔσται ·
It will be so.

260	πυθέσθαι δ’ οὐδέν ἐστ’ ἔξω δρόμου , πόθεν χοὰς ἔπεμψεν , ἐκ τίνος λόγου μεθύστερον τιμῶσ’ ἀνήκεστον πάθος ;
But it is in no way amiss to inquire how, from what motive, she came to send her libations, seeking too late to make amends for an irremediable deed.

261	θανόντι δ’ οὐ φρονοῦντι δειλαία χάρις ἐπέμπετ’ ·
They would be a sorry gift to send to the senseless dead.

262	οὐκ ἔχοιμ’ ἂν εἰκάσαι τόδε ·
I cannot guess what they mean.

263	τὰ δῶρα μείω δ’ ἐστὶ τῆς ἁμαρτίας ·
The gifts are too paltry for her offence.

264	τὰ πάντα γάρ τις ἐκχέας ἀνθ’ αἵματος ἑνός , μάτην ὁ μόχθος ·
For though a man may pour out all he has in atonement for one deed of blood, it is wasted effort.

265	ὧδ’ ἔχει λόγος ·
So the saying goes.

266	θέλοντι δ’ , εἴπερ οἶσθ’ , ἐμοὶ φράσον τάδε .
If indeed you know, tell me: I wish to learn.

267	οἶδ’ , ὦ τέκνον , παρῆ γάρ ·
I know, my child, for I was there.

268	ἔκ τ’ ὀνειράτων καὶ νυκτιπλάγκτων δειμάτων πεπαλμένη χοὰς ἔπεμψε τάσδε δύσθεος γυνή .
It was because she was shaken by dreams and wandering terrors of the night that she sent these offerings, godless woman that she is.

269	ἦ καὶ πέπυσθε τ- ὄναρ , ὥστ’ ὀρθῶς φράσαι ;
Orestes: And have you learned the nature of the dream so as to tell it properly?

270	τεκεῖν δράκοντ’ ἔδοξεν , ὡς αὐτὴ λέγει .
Chorus: She dreamed she gave birth to a serpent: that is her own account.

271	καὶ ποῖ τελευτᾷ καὶ καρανοῦται λόγος ;
Orestes: And where does the tale end, and what is its consummation?

272	ἐν ι παιδὸς ὁρμίσαι δίκην .
Chorus: She laid it to rest as if it were a child, in swaddling clothes.

273	τίνος βορᾶς χρῄζοντα , νεογενὲς δάκος ;
Orestes: What food did it crave, the newborn viper?

274	αὐτὴ προσέσχε μαζὸν ἐν τ- ὀνείρατι .
Chorus: In her dream she offered it her own breast.

275	καὶ πῶς ἄτρωτον οὖθαρ ἦν ὑπὸ στύγους ;
Orestes: Surely her nipple was not unwounded by the loathsome beast?

276	ὥστ’ ἐν γάλακτι θρόμβον αἵματος σπάσαι .
Chorus: No: it drew in clotted blood with the milk.

277	οὔτοι μάταιον ·
Orestes: Truly it is not without meaning: the vision signifies a man!

278	ἀνδρὸς ὄψανον πέλει .
Chorus: Then from out of her sleep she raised a shriek and awoke appalled, and many lamps that

had been blinded in the darkness flared up in the house to cheer our mistress. 

279	ἡ δ’ ἐξ ὕπνου κέκλαγγεν ἐπτοημένη .
Then she sent these libations for the dead in the hope that they might be an effective cure for her distress.

280	πολλοὶ δ’ ἀνῇθον , ἐκτυφλωθέντες σκότῳ , λαμπτῆρες ἐν δόμοισι δεσποίνης χάριν ·
Then she sent these libations for the dead in the hope that they might be an effective cure for her distress.

281	πέμπει τ’ ἔπειτα τάσδε κηδείους χοάς , ἄκος τομαῖον ἐλπίσασα πημάτων .
Orestes: Well then, I pray to this earth and to my father’s grave that this dream may come to its fulfilment in me. 

282	ἀλλ’ εὔχομαι γῇ τῇδε καὶ πατρὸς τάφῳ τ- ὄνειρον εἶναι τοῦτ’ ἐμοὶ τελεσφόρον .
As I understand it, it fits at every point. 

283	κρίνω δέ τοί νιν ὥστε συγκόλλως ἔχειν .
For if the snake left the same place as I; if it was furnished with my swaddling clothes; if it sought to open its mouth to take the breast that nourished me and mixed the sweet milk with clotted blood while she shrieked for terror at this, then surely, as she has nourished a portentous thing of horror, she must die by violence.

284	εἰ γὰρ τὸν αὐτὸν χῶρον ἐκλιπὼν ἐμοὶ οὕφις ἐμοῖσι σπαργάνοις ὡπλίζετο , καὶ μαστὸν ἀμφέχασκ’ ἐμὸν θρεπτήριον , θρόμβῳ δ’ ἔμειξεν αἵματος φίλον γάλα , ἡ δ’ ἀμφὶ τάρβει τῷδ’ ἐπῴμωξεν πάθει , δεῖ τοί νιν , ὡς ἔθρεψεν ἔκπαγλον τέρας , θανεῖν βιαίως ·
For I, turned serpent, am her killer, as this dream declares.

285	ἐκδρακοντωθεὶς δ’ ἐγὼ κτείνω νιν , ὡς τ- ὄνειρον ἐννέπει τόδε .
Chorus: I choose your reading of this portent. Let it be so. As for the rest, give your friends their parts. Tell some what to do, others what to leave undone.

286	τερασκόπον δὴ τῶνδέ σ’ αἱροῦμαι πέρι .
It is a simple story. My sister must go inside, and I charge her to keep concealed this pact with me,

287	γένοιτο δ’ οὕτως .
so that as by craft they killed a worthy man, so by craft they may likewise be caught and perish in the very same snare, even as Loxias decreed, lord Apollo, the prophet who has never before been false.

288	τ- ἄλλα δ’ ἐξηγοῦ φίλοις , τοὺς μέν τι ποιεῖν , τοὺς δὲ μή τι δρᾶν λέγων .
In the guise of a stranger, one fully equipped, I will come to the outer gate, and with me Pylades, whom you see here, as a guest and ally of the house.

289	ἁπλοῦς ὁ μῦθος ·
Both of us will speak the speech of Parnassus, imitating the accent of a Phocian tongue.

290	τήνδε μὲν στείχειν ἔσω , αἰνῶ δὲ κρύπτειν τάσδε συνθήκας ἐμάς , ὡς ἂν δόλῳ κτείναντες ἄνδρα τίμιον δόλοισι καὶ ληφθῶσιν ἐν τ- αὐτῷ βρόχῳ θανόντες , καὶ Λοξίας ἐφήμισεν , ἄναξ Ἀπόλλων , μάντις ἀψευδὴς τὸ πρίν .
And in case none of the keepers of the door will give us a hearty welcome on the plea that the house is afflicted with trouble by the gods, then we will wait so that anyone passing the house will consider and say: Why then does Aegisthus have his door shut on his suppliant, if in fact he is at home and knows?

291	ξένῳ γὰρ εἰκώς , παντελῆ σαγὴν ἔχων , ἥξω σὺν ἀνδρὶ τῷδ’ ἐφ’ ἑρκείους πύλας Πυλάδῃ , ξένος τε καὶ δορύξενος δόμων .
But if I indeed pass the outermost threshold of the gate and find that man sitting on my father’s throne, or if then coming face to face with me he lifts and casts down his eyes, know well: before he can even say "Of what land is this stranger?"

292 ἄμφω δὲ φωνὴν ἥσομεν Παρνησσίδα , γλώσσης ἀυτὴν Φωκίδος μιμουμένω .
Both of us will speak the speech of Parnassus, imitating the accent of a Phocian tongue.

293	καὶ δὴ θυρωρῶν οὔτις ἂν φαιδρᾷ φρενὶ δέξαιτ’ , ἐπειδὴ δαιμονᾷ δόμος κακοῖς ·
And in case none of the keepers of the door will give us a hearty welcome
on the plea that the house is afflicted with trouble by the gods, 



294	μενοῦμεν οὕτως ὥστ’ ἐπεικάζειν τινὰ δόμους παραστείχοντα καὶ τάδ’ ἐννέπειν ·
then we will wait so that anyone passing the house will consider and say: 

295	τί δὴ πύλαισι τὸν ἱκέτην ἀπείργεται Αἴγισθος , εἴπερ οἶδεν ἔνδημος παρών ;
Why then does Aegisthus have his door shut on his suppliant, if in fact he is at home and knows?


296	εἰ δ’ οὖν ἀμείψω βαλὸν ἑρκείων πυλῶν κ- ἐκεῖνον ἐν θρόνοισιν εὑρήσω πατρός , ἢ καὶ μολὼν ἔπειτά μοι κατὰ στόμα ἀρεῖ , σάφ’ ἴσθι , καὶ κατ’ ὀφθαλμοὺς βαλεῖ , πρὶν αὐτὸν εἰπεῖν ποδαπὸς ὁ ξένος ;
But if I indeed pass the outermost threshold of the gate and find that man sitting on my father’s throne, or if then coming face to face with me he lifts and casts down his eyes, know well: before he can even say Of what land is this stranger?

297	νεκρὸν θήσω , ποδώκει περιβαλὼν χαλκεύματι .
I will skewer him with my swift sword and lay him dead.

298	φόνου δ’ Ἐρινὺς οὐχ ὑπεσπανισμένη ἄκρατον αἷμα πίεται τρίτην πόσιν .
The fury that has no fill of slaughter shall for her third and crowning drink drink unmixed blood!

299	νῦν οὖν σὺ μὲν φύλασσε τ- ἐν οἴκῳ καλῶς , ὅπως ἂν ἀρτίκολλα συμβαίνῃ τάδε ·
Now you, Electra, keep strict watch over what happens inside the house, so that our plans may fit together well.

300	ὑμῖν δ’ ἐπαινῶ γλῶσσαν εὔφημον φέρειν , σιγᾶν θ’ ὅπου δεῖ καὶ λέγειν τὰ καίρια .
You addressing the Chorus had best keep a discreet tongue: be silent when there is need and speak only what the occasion demands.

301	τὰ δ’ ἄλλα τούτῳ δεῦρ’ ἐποπτεῦσαι λέγω , ξιφηφόρους ἀγῶνας ὀρθώσαντί μοι .
As for the rest, I call on him[*] to cast his glance this way and direct the contest of the sword for me. Exeunt Orestes, Pylades, and Electra

302	πολλὰ μὲν γᾶ τρέφει δεινὰ καὶ δειμάτων ἄχη , πόντιαί τ’ ἀγκάλαι κνωδάλων ἀνταίων βρύουσι ·
Chorus: Many are the horrors, dread and appalling, bred of earth, and the arms of the deep teem with hateful monsters.

303	πλάθουσι βλαστοῦσι καὶ πεδαίχμιοι λαμπάδες πεδάοροι , πτανά τε καὶ πεδοβάμονα κ- ἀνεμοέντʼ ἂν αἰγίδων φράσαι κότον .


303	πλάθουσι βλαστοῦσι καὶ πεδαίχμιοι λαμπάδες πεδάοροι , πτανά τε καὶ πεδοβάμονα κ- ἀνεμοέντʼ ἂν αἰγίδων φράσαι κότον .
Likewise between heaven and earth lights[*] hung high in the air draw near; and winged things and things that walk the earth can also tell of the stormy wrath of whirlwinds.

304	ἀλλ’ ὑπέρτολμον ἀνδρὸς φρόνημα τίς λέγοι καὶ γυναικῶν φρεσὶν τλαμόνων καὶ παντόλμους ἔρωτας ἄταισι συννόμους βροτῶν ;
But who can tell of man’s overweening spirit, and of the reckless passions of women hardened of soul, partners of the woes of mortals?

305	ξυζύγους δ’ ὁμαυλίας θηλυκρατὴς ἀπέρωτος ἔρως παρανικᾷ κνωδάλων τε καὶ βροτῶν .
Inordinate passion, overmastering the female, gains a fatal victory over the wedded unions of beasts and humans alike.

306	ἴστω δ’ , ὅστις οὐχ ὑπόπτερος φροντίσιν , δαεὶς τὰν ἁ παιδολυμὰς τάλαινα Θεστιὰς μήσατο πυρδαῆτιν πρόνοιαν , καταίθουσα παιδὸς δαφοινὸν δαλὸν ἥλικ’ , ἐπεὶ μολὼν ματρόθεν κελάδησε , ξύμμετρόν τε διαὶ βίου μοιρόκραντον ἐς ἆμαρ .
Let whoever is not flighty in his wits know this, when he has learned of the device of a lit brand contrived by Thestius’ heartless daughter:[*] she destroyed her own child by burning the charred brand of the same age as he when, coming from his mother’s womb, he cried out, and it aged in pace with him through his life to the day decreed by fate.

307	ἄλλαν δεῖ τιν’ ἐν λόγοις στυγεῖν φοινίαν κόραν , ἅτ’ ἐχθρῶν ὑπαὶ φῶτ’ ἀπώλεσεν φίλον Κρητικοῖς χρυσοκμήτοισιν ὅρμοις πιθήσασα δώροισι Μίνω , Νῖσον ἀθανάτας τριχὸς νοσφίσασ’ ἀπροβούλως πνέονθ’ ἁ κυνόφρων ὕπνῳ .
And there is in legend another murderous virgin to be loathed,[*] who ruined a loved one at the bidding of his foes, when, lured by Minos’ gift, the Cretan necklace forged of gold, she with her dog’s heart despoiled Nisus of his immortal lock as he drew breath in unsuspecting sleep. And Hermes[*] overtook him.

308	κιγχάνει δέ μιν Ἑρμῆς .
And Hermes[*] overtook him.

309	ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐπεμνασάμαν ἀμειλίχων πόνων , ὁ καιρὸς δὲ δυσφιλὲς γαμήλευμ’ ἀπεύχετον δόμοις γυναικοβούλους τε μήτιδας φρενῶν ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ τευχεσφόρῳ , ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ δᾴοις ἐπεικότως σέβαι .
But since I have recalled tales of pitiless afflictions, it is the right time to tell of a marriage void of love, an abomination to the house, and the plots devised by a wife’s cunning against her warrior lord, against her lord revered with reason by his foes.

310	τίω δ’ ἀθέρμαντον ἑστίαν δόμων γυναικείαν τ’ ἄτολμον αἰχμάν .
But I honor the hearths of homes not heated by passion’s fires, and in woman a spirit that shrinks from audacious deeds.

311	κακῶν δὲ πρεσβεύεται τὸ Λήμνιον λόγῳ ·
Indeed the Lemnian[*] holds first place among evils in story: it has long been told with groans as an abominable calamity.

312	γοᾶται δὲ δὴ πάθος κατάπτυστον ·
Men compare each new horror to Lemnian troubles;

313	ᾔκασεν δέ τις τὸ δεινὸν αὖ Λημνίοισι πήμασιν .
and because of a woeful deed abhorred by the gods a race has disappeared, cast out in infamy from among mortals.

314	θεοστυγήτῳ δ’ ἄχει βροτῶν ἀτιμωθὲν οἴχεται γένος .
For no man reveres what is hated by the gods.

315	σέβει γὰρ οὔτις τὸ δυσφιλὲς θεοῖς .
Is there one of these tales I have gathered that I do not justly cite?

316	τί τῶνδ

’ οὐκ ἐνδίκως ἀγείρω ;
Is there one of these tales I have gathered that I do not justly cite?

317	τὸ δ’ ἄγχι πλευμόνων ξίφος διανταίαν ὀξυπευκὲς οὐτᾷ διαὶ Δίκας .
But the keen and bitter sword is near the breast and drives home its blow at the bidding of Justice.

318	τὸ μὴ θέμις γὰρ οὖν λὰξ πέδοι πατούμενον , τὸ πᾶν Διὸς σέβας παρεκβάντος οὐ θεμιστῶς .
For truly the injustice of him who has unjustly transgressed the sovereign majesty of Zeus lies on the ground trampled under foot.

319	Δίκας δ’ ἐρείδεται πυθμήν ·
The anvil of Justice is planted firm.

320	προχαλκεύει δ’ Αἶσα φασγανουργός ·
Destiny fashions her arms and forges her sword quickly,

321	τέκνον δ’ ἐπεισφέρει δόμοισιν αἱμάτων παλαιτέρων τίνειν μύσος χρόνῳ κλυτὰ βυσσόφρων Ἐρινύς .
and the famed and deeply brooding Fury is bringing the son into our house, to requite at last the pollution of blood shed long ago.

322 παῖ παῖ , θύρας ἄκουσον ἑρκείας κτύπον .
Boy! Boy! Hear my knocking at the outer door!

323 τίς ἔνδον , ὦ παῖ , παῖ , μάλ’ αὖθις , ἐν δόμοις ;
Who is inside? Boy! Boy! I say again, who is at home?

324 τρίτον τόδ’ ἐκπέραμα δωμάτων καλῶ , εἴπερ φιλόξεν’ ἐστὶν Αἰγίσθου διαί .
Again for the third time I call for someone to come out of the house, if by Aegisthus’ will it offers welcome to strangers.

325 εἶεν , ἀκούω ·
Yes, yes, I hear.

326 ποδαπὸς ὁ ξένος ;
Of what land is the stranger, 

327 πόθεν ;
and whence?

328	ἄγγελλε τοῖσι κυρίοισι δωμάτων , πρὸς οὕσπερ ἥκω καὶ φέρω καινοὺς λόγους .
Announce me to the masters of the house, for it is in fact to them that I come bearing news.

329	τάχυνε δ’ , ὡς καὶ νυκτὸς ἅρμ’ ἐπείγεται σκοτεινόν , ὥρα δ’ ἐμπόρους καθιέναι ἄγκυραν ἐν δόμοισι πανδόκοις ξένων .
And hurry, since the chariot of night is speeding on with darkness, and it is time for wayfarers to drop anchor in some house friendly to all guests.

330	ἐξελθέτω τις δωμάτων τελεσφόρος γυνὴ τόπαρχος , ἄνδρα δ’ εὐπρεπέστερον ·
Tell someone to come forth who has authority over the house, the mistress in charge. But the master would be more fitting,

331	αἰδὼς γὰρ ἐν λεχθεῖσιν οὐκ ἐπαργέμους λόγους τίθησιν ·
for then no delicacy in speaking makes words obscure: 



332	εἶπε θαρσήσας ἀνὴρ πρὸς ἄνδρα κ- ἐσήμηνεν ἐμφανὲς τέκμαρ .
man speaks boldly to man and reveals his meaning without reserve.


333	ξένοι , λέγοιτ’ ἂν εἴ τι δεῖ ·
Clytaemestra
Strangers, you have only to declare your need,

334	πάρεστι γὰρ ὁποῖά περ δόμοισι τοῖσδ’ ἐπεικότα , καὶ θερμὰ λουτρὰ καὶ πόνων θελκτηρία στρωμνή , δικαίων τ’ ὀμμάτων παρουσία .
for we have everything that suits this house: warm baths, beds to charm away fatigue, and the presence of honest faces.

335	ἀλλ’ εἰ τι ἄλλο πρᾷκτον ἔνδον , τῶν ἀνδρῶν τοῦτο ἐστὶν ἐργον ἐρεῖν , τούτοισιν ἀγγελοῦμεν .
But if there is another matter requiring graver counsel, that is the concern of men, and we will communicate with them.

335	εἰ δ’ ἄλλο πρᾶξαι δεῖ τι βουλιώτερον , ἀνδρῶν τόδ’ ἐστὶν ἔργον , οἷς κοινώσομεν ξένος μέν εἰμι Δαυλιεὺς ἐκ Φωκέων ·
But if there is another matter requiring graver counsel, that is the concern of men, and we will communicate with them. Stranger I am, a Daulian from the Phocians;

336	στείχοντα δ’ αὐτόφορτον οἰκείᾳ σαγῇ εἰς Ἄργος , ὥσπερ δεῦρ’ ἀπεζύγην πόδα , ἀγνὼς πρὸς ἀγνῶτ’ εἶπε συμβαλὼν ἀνήρ , ἐξιστορήσας καὶ σαφηνίσας ὁδόν , Στροφίος ὁ Φωκεύς ·
As I was on my way, carrying my pack on business of my own to Argos, just as I ended my journey here, a man, a stranger to me as I to him, fell in with me, and inquired about my destination and told me his. He was Strophius, a Phocian;

337	πεύθομαι γὰρ ἐν λόγῳ ἐπείπερ ἄλλως , ὦ ξέν’ , εἰς Ἄργος κίεις , πρὸς τοὺς τεκόντας πανδίκως μεμνημένος τεθνεῶτ’ Ὀρέστην εἰπέ , μηδαμῶς λάθῃ .
(for as we talked I learned his name), and he said to me, "Stranger, since in any case you are bound for Argos, keep my message in mind most faithfully and tell his parents Orestes is dead, and by no means let it escape you."

338	εἴτ’ οὖν κομίζειν δόξα νικήσει φίλων , εἴτ’ οὖν μέτοικον , εἰς τὸ πᾶν ἀεὶ ξένον , θάπτειν , ἐφετμὰς τάσδε πόρθμευσον πάλιν .
Whether his friends decide to bring him home or to bury him in the land of his sojourn, a foreigner utterly forever, convey their wishes back to me.

339	νῦν γὰρ λέβητος χαλκέου πλευρώματα σποδὸν κέκευθεν ἀνδρὸς εὖ κεκλαυμένου .
In the meantime a bronze urn contains the ashes of a man rightly lamented.

340	τοσαῦτ’ ἀκούσας εἶπον .
This much I tell you as I heard it.

341	εἰ δὲ τυγχάνω τοῖς κυρίοισι καὶ προσήκου

341	εἰ δὲ τυγχάνω τοῖς κυρίοισι καὶ προσήκουσιν λέγων οὐκ οἶδα , τὸν τεκόντα δ’ εἰκὸς εἰδέναι .
Whether by any chance I am speaking to those with whom the question rests and whose concern it is, I do not know. But his parent should know the truth.

342	οἲ ’γώ , κατ’ ἄκρας εἶπας ὡς πορθούμεθα .
Oh no! Your story spells our utter undoing.

343	ὦ δυσπάλαιστε τῶνδε δωμάτων Ἀρά , ὡς πόλλ’ ἐπωπᾷς , κ- ἐκποδὼν εὖ κείμενα τόξοις πρόσωθεν εὐσκόποις χειρουμένη , φίλων ἀποψιλοῖς με τὴν παναθλίαν .
O curse that haunts this house, so hard to wrestle down: how far forward you look! Even what was laid well out of harm’s way you bring down with your well-aimed shafts from far off, and you strip me of those I love, utterly wretched as I am.


344	καὶ νῦν Ὀρέστης — ἦν γὰρ εὐβούλως ἔχων , ἔξω κομίζων ὀλεθρίου πηλοῦ πόδα , — νῦν δ’ ἥπερ ἐν δόμοισι βακχείας καλῆς ἰατρὸς ἐλπὶς ἦν , προδοῦσαν ἔγγραφε .
And now Orestes - he was indeed prudent in keeping his foot out of the mire of destruction, but now mark down as having abandoned us what was once the one hope in our house of a cure for its fine revelry.

345	ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν ξένοισιν ὧδ’ εὐδαίμοσιν κεδνῶν ἕκατι πραγμάτων ἂν ἤθελον γνωστὸς γενέσθαι καὶ ξενωθῆναι ·
As for me, I am sure that with hosts so prosperous I would rather have been made known and welcomed for favorable news. For where is goodwill greater than from guest to host?

346	τί γὰρ ξένου ξένοισίν ἐστιν εὐμενέστερον ;
Yet to my mind it would have been irreverent

347	πρὸς δυσσεβείας δ’ ἦν ἐμοὶ τόδ’ ἐν φρεσίν , τοιόνδε πρᾶγμα μὴ καρανῶσαι φίλοις , καταινέσαντα καὶ κατεξενωμένον .
not to fulfill for friends a charge like this when I was bound by promise and hospitality pledged to me.

348	οὔτοι κυρήσεις μεῖον ἀξίως σέθεν , οὐδ’ ἧσσον ἂν γένοιο δώμασιν φίλος .
Rest assured you will receive no less a reward than you deserve nor be the less welcome to this house: someone else might just as well have brought your message.

349	ἄλλος δ’ ὁμοίως ἦλθεν ἂν τάδ’ ἀγγελῶν .
But it is the hour when strangers who have been travelling on a long day’s journey should have their proper entertainment.

350	ἀλλ’ ἔσθ’ ὁ καιρὸς ἡμερεύοντας ξένους μακρᾶς κελεύθου τυγ

χάνειν τὰ πρόσφορα .
To an attendant: Conduct him to the rooms where the men are hospitably lodged, him and his attendants here and his fellow-traveller, and let them be tended to there as is proper in our house.

351	ἄγ’ αὐτὸν εἰς ἀνδρῶνας εὐξένους δόμων , ὀπισθόπους τε τούσδε καὶ ξυνέμπορον ·
I command you to do this as you shall be held to strict account.

352	κ- ἐκεῖ κυρούντων δώμασιν τὰ πρόσφορα .
Meantime we will communicate this matter to the master of the house, and since we have no lack of friends we will confer on this occurrence.

353	αἰνῶ δὲ πράσσειν ὡς ὑπευθύνῳ τάδε .
For men have come, bearing greater power, and they mourn your own dear death in sorrow.

354	ἡμεῖς δὲ ταῦτα τοῖς κρατοῦσι δωμάτων κοινώσομέν τε κ- οὐ σπανίζοντες φίλων βουλευσόμεσθα τῆσδε συμφορᾶς πέρι .
Oh child, hear the knocking at the outer door.

355 εἶεν , φίλιαι δμωίδες οἴκων , πότε δὴ στομάτων δείξομεν ἰσχὺν ἐπ’ Ὀρέστῃ ;
Ah, loyal handmaidens of the house, how long will it be before we display the power that lies in our mouths to do Orestes service?

356 ὦ πότνια χθὼν καὶ πότνι’ ἀκτὴ χώματος , ἣ νῦν ἐπὶ ναυάρχῳ σώματι κεῖσαι τῷ βασιλείῳ , νῦν ἐπάκουσον , νῦν ἐπάρηξον ·
O hallowed earth, and hallowed barrow raised high that now lies on the royal form of the commander of the fleet, now hear me, now lend me aid!

357 νῦν γὰρ ἀκμάζει Πειθὼ δολίαν ξυγκαταβῆναι , χθόνιον δ’ Ἑρμῆν καὶ τὸν νύχιον τοῖσδ’ ἐφοδεῦσαι ξιφοδηλήτοισιν ἀγῶσιν .
Now is the hour for Persuasion with her guile to join forces with him, and for Hermes of the nether world, who works in stealth, to direct this encounter of the deadly sword.

358 ἔοικεν ἁνὴρ ὁ ξένος τεύχειν κακόν ;
Our stranger, I think, is working mischief.

359 τροφὸν δ’ Ὀρέστου τήνδ’ ὁρῶ κεκλαυμένην .
For over there I see Orestes' nurse all in tears.

360 ποῖ δὴ πατεῖς , Κίλισσα , δωμάτων πύλας ;
Cilissa! Where are you going in the palace gate? 

361 λύπη δ’ ἄμισθός ἐστί σοι ξυνέμπορος ;
Do you have a grief as an unhired companion?

362	Αἴγισθον ἡ κρατοῦσα τοῖς ξένοις καλεῖν ὅπως τάχιστ’ ἄνωγεν, ὡς σαφέστερον ἀνὴρ ἀπ’ ἀνδρὸς τὴν νεάγγελτον φάτιν ἐλθὼν πύθηται τήνδε, πρὸς μὲν οἰκέτας θετοσκυθρωπῶν ἐντὸς ὀμμάτων γέλων κεύθουσ’ ἐπ’ ἔργοις διαπεπραγμένοις καλῶς κείνῃ, δόμοις δὲ τοῖσδε παγκάκως ἔχειν, φήμης ὕφ’ ἧς ἤγγειλαν οἱ ξένοι τορῶς.
My mistress commands me to summon Aegisthus for the strangers in all haste, so that he may come and learn more clearly, from man to man, these tidings that have just arrived. Indeed, before the servants, behind eyes that feigned grief she hid her laughter over what has occurred fortunately for her. But the news so plainly told by the strangers means utter ruin for this house. I expect that when he hears it he will rejoice in his heart to know the story. Miserable woman that I am! How the old unbearable troubles of every sort that occurred in this house of Atreus have always made my heart ache within my breast! But never yet have I endured a blow like this. For all the other troubles I bore patiently, but my beloved Orestes, on whom I spent my soul, whom I took from his mother at birth and nursed, and the many and troublesome tasks, fruitless for all my enduring them, when his loud and urgent cries broke my rest... For one must nurse the senseless thing like a dumb beast, of course one must, by following its humor. For while it is still a baby in swaddling clothes, it has no speech at all, whether hunger moves it, or thirst perhaps, or the call of need: children's young insides work their own relief. I would anticipate these needs. Yet many a time, I think, having to wash the child's linen because of my own errors, laundress and nurse had the same function. It was I who, with these two handicrafts, received Orestes for his father. And now, wretch that I am, I hear that he is dead. But I am on my way to fetch the man who wrought destruction on our house, and he will be glad enough to hear

this news.

363	ἦ δὴ κλύων ἐκεῖνος εὐφρανεῖ νόον, εὖτ’ ἂν πύθηται μῦθον.
Indeed, hearing this, he will surely rejoice in his heart when he learns the story.

364	ὦ τάλαιν’ ἐγώ;
Wretched woman that I am!

365	ὥς μοι τὰ μὲν παλαιὰ συγκεκραμένα ἄλγη δύσοιστα τοῖσδ’ ἐν Ἀτρέως δόμοις τυχόντ’ ἐμὴν ἤλγυνεν ἐν στέρνοις φρένα.
How the old unbearable troubles of every sort that occurred in this house of Atreus have always made my heart ache within my breast!

366	ἀλλ’ οὔτι πω τοιόνδε πῆμ’ ἀνεσχόμην;
But never yet have I endured a blow like this.

367	τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἄλλα τλημόνως ἤντλουν κακά;
For all the other troubles I bore patiently.

368	φίλον δ’ Ὀρέστην, τῆς ἐμῆς ψυχῆς τριβήν, ὃν ἐξέθρεψα μητρόθεν δεδεγμένη;
But my beloved Orestes, on whom I spent my soul, whom I took from his mother at birth and nursed...

369	— κ- ἔκ’ νυκτιπλάγκτων ὀρθίων κελευμάτων καὶ πολλὰ καὶ μοχθήρ’ ἀνωφέλητ’ ἐμοὶ τλάσῃ;
...and the many and troublesome tasks, fruitless for all my enduring them, when his loud and urgent cries broke my rest...For one must nurse the senseless thing like a dumb beast, of course one must,

370	τρόπῳ φρενός;

by following its humor.


371	οὐ γάρ τι φωνεῖ παῖς ἔτ’ ὢν ἐν σπαργάνοις, εἰ λιμός, ἢ δίψη τις, ἢ λιψουρία ἔχει;
... 
For while it is still a baby in swaddling clothes, it has no speech at all, whether hunger moves it, or thirst perhaps, or the call of need.

372	νέα δὲ νηδὺς αὐτάρκης τέκνων.
Children's young insides work their own relief.

373	τούτων πρόμαντις οὖσα, πολλὰ δ’, οἴομαι, ψευσθεῖσα παιδὸς σπαργάνων φαιδρύντρια, γναφεὺς τροφεύς τε τ- αὐτὸν εἰχέτην τέλος.
Having anticipated these needs, and many times, I believe, mistaken in cheering the swaddling clothes of the child, I played the roles of both launderer and nurse.

374	ἐγὼ διπλᾶς δὲ τάσδε χειρωναξίας ἔχουσ’ Ὀρέστην ἐξεδεξάμην πατρί.
I, who with these two tasks received Orestes from his father;

375	τεθνηκότος δὲ νῦν τάλαινα πεύθομαι.
and now, miserable woman, I hear that he is dead.

376	στείχω δ’ ἐπ’ ἄνδρα τῶνδε λυμαντήριον οἴκων, θέλων δὲ τόνδε πεύσεται λόγον.
I am on my way to the man who has brought ruin upon this house, and he will surely be eager to hear this news.

377	πῶς οὖν κελεύει νιν μολεῖν ἐσταλμένον;
Then how does she order him to come, having been summoned?

378	ἦ πῶς;
How?

379	λέγ’ αὖθις, ὡς μάθω σαφέστερον.
Say it again, that I may understand more clearly.

380	εἰ ξὺν λοχίταις εἴτε καὶ μονοστιβῆ.
Whether with his guards or perhaps unattended.

381	ἄγειν κελεύει δορυφόρους ὀπάονας.
She orders him to bring his spear-bearing attendants.

382	μή νυν σὺ ταῦτ’ ἄγγελλε δεσπότου στύγει;
Do not give this message to our hated master.

383	ἀλλ’ αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν, ὡς ἀδειμάντως κλύῃ, ἄνωχθ’ ὅσον τάχιστα γηθούσῃ φρενί.
But tell him to come alone, so he may hear without fear, as quickly as possible and with a joyful heart.

384	ἐν ἀγγέλῳ γὰρ κυπτὸς ὀρθοῦται λόγος.
For in the mouth of a messenger, a crooked message is made straight.

385	ἀλλ’ ἦ φρονεῖς εὖ τοῖσι νῦν ἠγγελμένοις;
But are you really pleased with the news that has been announced?

386	ἀλλ’ εἰ τροπαίαν Ζεὺς κακῶν θήσει ποτέ.
Perhaps Zeus will one day set up a trophy to our misfortunes.

387	καὶ πῶς;
And how so?

388	Ὀρέστης ἐλπὶς οἴχεται δόμων.
Orestes, the hope of the house, is gone.

389	οὔπω;
Not yet.

390	κακός γε μάντις ἂν γνοίη τάδε.
He would be a poor prophet who interpreted thus.

391	τί φής;
What are you saying?

392	ἔχεις τι τῶν λελεγμένων δίχα;
Do you have some knowledge different from what has been told?

393	ἄγγελλ’ ἰοῦσα, πρᾶσσε τ- ἀπεσταλμένα.
Go and deliver your message, do what you have been sent to do.

394	μέλει θεοῖσιν ὧνπερ ἂν μέλῃ πέρι.
The gods take care of whatever they care about.

395	ἀλλ’ εἶμι καὶ σοῖς ταῦτα πείσομαι λόγοις.
But I will go and be persuaded by your words.

396	γένοιτο δ’ ὡς ἄριστα σὺν θεῶν δόσει.
May it turn out as best as possible, with the gods’ blessing.

397	νῦν παραιτουμένᾳ μοι, πάτερ Ζεῦ θεῶν Ὀλυμπίων, δὸς τύχας τυχεῖν δόμου κυρίως τὰ σώφρον’ εὖ μαιομένοις ἰδεῖν.
Now, as I make my plea, Father Zeus, king of the Olympian gods, grant that those who rule the house may meet with good fortune and see the outcome of their wise plans.

398	διὰ δίκας πᾶν ἔπος ἔλακον;
I have spoken every word through justice.

399	ὦ Ζεῦ, σύ νιν φυλάσσοις.
O Zeus, may you watch over it.

400 ἓ ἕ , πρὸ δὲ δὴ ’χθρῶν τὸν ἔσωθεν μελάθρων , Ζεῦ , θές , ἐπεί νιν μέγαν ἄρας , δίδυμα καὶ τριπλᾶ παλίμποινα θέλων ἀμείψει .
Set him who is within the palace before his foes, O Zeus; since, if you exalt him, he will gladly pay you with double and triple recompense.

401 ἴσθι δ’ ἀνδρὸς φίλου πῶλον εὖνιν ζυγέντ’ ἐν ἅρμασιν πημάτων .
Know that the orphaned colt of a loved one is harnessed to the chariot of distress.

402 σὺ δ’ ἐν δρόμῳ προστιθεὶς μέτρον κτίσον σῳζόμενον ῥυθμὸν τοῦτ’ ἰδεῖν διὰ πέδον ἀνομένων βημάτων ὄρεγμα ;
And by setting bounds to his course may you grant that we see him keep a steady pace through this race and win the goal in the straining stride of a gallop.

403 οἵ τ’ ἔσω δωμάτων πλουτογαθῆ μυχὸν νομίζετε , κλῦτε , σύμφρονες θεοί ;
And you who within the house inhabit the inner chamber that exults in its wealth, hear me, you gods, that feel with us!

404 ἄγετε τῶν πάλαι πεπραγμένων λύσασθ’ αἷμα προσφάτοις δίκαις .
By a fresh award redeem the blood of deeds done long ago.

405 γέρων φόνος μηκέτ’ ἐν δόμοις τέκοι .
May aged Murder cease begetting offspring in our house!

406 τὸ δὲ καλῶς κτίμενον ὦ μέγα ναίων στόμιον , εὖ δὸς ἀνιδεῖν δόμον ἀνδρός , καί νιν ἐλευθερίας φῶς λαμπρὸν ἰδεῖν φιλίοις ὄμμασιν ἐκ δνοφερᾶς καλύπτρας .
And you who occupy the mighty, gorgeously built cavern, grant that the man’s house may lift up its eyes again in joy, and that with glad eyes it may behold from under its veil of gloom the radiant light of freedom.

407 ξυλλάβοι δ’ ἐνδίκως παῖς ὁ Μαίας , ἐπεὶ φορώτατος πρᾶξιν οὐρίαν θέλων ;
May Maia’s son, as he rightfully should, lend his aid, for no one can better sail a deed on a favoring course, when he would do so.

408 πολλὰ δ’ ἄλλα φανεῖ χρηίζων κρυπτά .
And many another hidden thing he will make plain, if he desires.



409 ἄσκοπον δ’ ἔπος λέγων νύκτα πρό τ’ ὀμμάτων σκότον φέρει , καθ’ ἡμέραν δ’ οὐδὲν ἐμφανέστερος .
But by his mysterious utterance he brings darkness over men’s eyes by night, and by day he is no more clear at all.

410 καὶ τότ’ ἤδη κλυτὸν δωμάτων λυτήριον , θῆλυν οὐριοστάταν οὐδ’ ὀξύκρεκτον γοατᾶν νόμον θήσομεν ·
And then at last with a loud voice we shall sing a song of the deliverance of our house, the song that women raise when the wind sits fair, and not the shrill strain of those who mourn.




411 πλεῖ τάδ’ εὖ ·
The ship goes well. 
412 ἐμὸν ἐμὸν κέρδος αὔξεται τόδ’ ·
This grows to profit for me, for me,
413 ἄτα δ’ ἀποστατεῖ φίλων .
 and calamity holds off from those I love.
414 σὺ δὲ θαρσῶν , ὅταν ἥκῃ μέρος ἔργων , ἐπαΰσας πατρὸς αὐδὰν θροούσᾳ πρὸς σὲ τέκνον πατρὸς αὐδὰν καὶ πέραιν’ ἀνεπίμομφον ἄταν .
But may you with good courage, when the part of action comes, cry out loud the name Father when she exclaims Son, and accomplish the baneful but irreproachable deed.

415	Περσέως τ’ ἐν φρεσὶν καρδίαν ἀνασχεθών , τοῖς θ’ ὑπὸ χθονὸς φίλοισιν , τοῖς τ’ ἄνωθεν πρόπρασσε χάριν ὀργᾶς λυγρᾶς , ἔνδοθεν φόνιον ἄταν τιθείς , τὸν αἴτιον δ’ ἐξαπολλύων μόρου .
Raise up Perseus’ spirit within my breast. And for those dear to you below the earth, and for those above, exact satisfaction for their dire wrath
by working bloody ruin in our house and obliterating the guilt of murder.

416	ἥκω μὲν οὐκ ἄκλητος , ἀλλ’ ὑπάγγελος ·
I have come not unasked but summoned by a messenger.

417	νέαν φάτιν δὲ πεύθομαι λέγειν τινὰς ξένους μολόντας οὐδαμῶς ἐφίμερον , μόρον δ’ Ὀρέστου .
I heard startling news told by some strangers who have arrived, tidings far from welcome: that Orestes is dead.

418	καὶ τόδ’ ἀμφέρειν δόμοις γένοιτ’ ἂν ἄχθος δειματοσταγὲς φόνῳ τῷ πρόσθεν ἑλκαίνουσι καὶ δεδηγμένοις .
To lay this too upon our house would be a fearful burden when it is still festering and galled by the wound inflicted by an earlier murder.

419	πῶς ταῦτ’ ἀληθῆ καὶ βλέποντα δοξάσω ;
How can I believe this tale is the living truth?

420	ἢ πρὸς γυναικῶν δειματούμενοι λόγοι πεδάρσιοι θρῴσκουσι , θνῄσκοντες μάτην ;
Or is it merely a panic-stricken report spread by women which leaps up to die away in nothingness?

421	τί τῶνδ’ ἂν εἴποις ὥστε δηλῶσαι φρενί ;
What can you tell me of this to make it plain to my mind?

422	ἠκούσαμεν μέν , πυνθάνου δὲ τῶν ξένων ἔσω παρελθών .
We heard the tale, it is true. But go inside and inquire of the strangers.

423	οὐδὲν ἀγγέλων σθένος ὡς αὐτὸν αὐτῶν ἄνδρα πεύθεσθαι πάρα .
The certainty of a messenger’s report is nothing compared with one’s own interrogation of the man himself.

424	ἰδεῖν ἐλέγξαι τ’ αὖ θέλω τὸν ἄγγελον , εἴτ’ αὐτὸς ἦν θνῄσκοντος ἐγγύθεν παρών , εἴτ’ ἐξ ἀμαυρᾶς κληδόνος λέγει μαθών .
I wish to see the messenger and put him to the test again—whether he himself was present at the death or merely repeats from vague reports what he has heard.

425	οὔτοι φρέν’ ἂν κλέψειεν ὠμματωμένην .
No! Be sure he cannot deceive a mind with eyes open.

426	Ζεῦ Ζεῦ , τί λέγω , πόθεν ἄρξωμαι τάδ’ ἐπευχομένη κ- ἐπιθεάζουσʼ , ὑπὸ δ’ εὐνοίας πῶς ἴσον εἰποῦσ’ ἀνύσωμαι ;
O Zeus, O Zeus, what should I say? Where shall I begin this prayer of mine, this appeal to the gods? How in my loyal zeal can I succeed in finding words to match need?

427	νῦν γὰρ μέλλουσι μιανθεῖσαι πειραὶ κοπάνων ἀνδροδαΐκτων ἢ πάνυ θήσειν Ἀγαμεμνονίων οἴκων ὄλεθρον διὰ παντός , ἢ πῦρ καὶ φῶς ἐπ’ ἐλευθερίᾳ δαίων ἀρχάς τε πολισσονόμους πατέρων θ’ ἕξει μέγαν ὄλβον .
Now is the moment when the blood-stained edges of the blades that lay men low are utterly forever to destroy the house of Agamemnon. Or else, kindling a flaming light in the cause of freedom, Orestes will win both the rule over his realm and the rich possessions of his fathers.

428	τοιάνδε πάλην μόνος ὢν ἔφεδρος δισσοῖς μέλλει θεῖος Ὀρέστης ἅψειν .
Our gallant Orestes, with no one to assist him, is now to meet with two in such a contest.

429	εἴη δ’ ἐπὶ νίκῃ .
And may it be to triumph!

430	ἒ ἔ , ὀτοτοτοῖ .
Oh! Oh! O woe!
431	ἔα ἔα μάλα ·
Ah! Ah! Alas!

432 πῶς ἔχει ;
What is happening?

433 πῶς κέκρανται δόμοις ;
What is being accomplished for our house?

434 ἀποσταθῶμεν πράγματος τελουμένου , ὅπως δοκῶμεν τῶνδ’ ἀναίτιαι κακῶν εἶναι ·
Let us stand apart while the matter is still unsettled so that we may be considered blameless in these ills.

435 μάχης γὰρ δὴ κεκύρωται τέλος .
For the issue of the fighting has now been decided.

436 οἴμοι , πανοίμοι δεσπότου πεπληγμένου ·
O woe, oh utter woe! My master is slain!

437 οἴμοι μάλ’ αὖθις ἐν τρίτοις προσφθέγμασιν .
O woe! I cry yet again, for the third time.

438 Αἴγισθος οὐκέτ’ ἔστιν .
Aegisthus is no more!

439 ἀλλ’ ἀνοίξατε ὅπως τάχιστα , καὶ γυναικείους πύλας μοχλοῖς χαλᾶτε ·
Come, with all speed! Unbar and open the women’s door!

440 καὶ μάλ’ ἡβῶντος δὲ δεῖ , οὐχ ὡς δ’ ἀρῆξαι διαπεπραγμένῳ ·
And a strong arm indeed is needed, but not to help him who is already slain: 

441 τί γάρ ;
what good is there in that?


442 ἰοὺ ἰού .
Help! Help!


443 κωφοῖς ἀυτῶ καὶ καθεύδουσιν μάτην ἄκραντα βάζω ;

Am I shouting to the deaf and fruitlessly wasting my voice on people who are asleep?
444 ποῖ Κλυταιμήστρα ;
Where has Clytaemestra gone?


445 τί δρᾷ ;
What is she doing?
446 ἔοικε νῦν αὐτῆς ἐπὶ ξυροῦ πέλας αὐχὴν πεσεῖσθαι πρὸς δίκην πεπληγμένος .

Her own neck, near the razor’s edge, is now ready to fall beneath the stroke.
447 τί δ’ ἐστὶ χρῆμα ;
What is this? 


448	τίνα βοὴν ἵστης δόμοις ;
What cry for help are you raising in our house?

449	τὸν ζῶντα καίνειν τοὺς τεθνηκότας λέγω .
I tell you the dead are killing the living.

450	οἲ ’γώ .
Ah!

451	ξυνῆκα τ- ἔπος ἐξ αἰνιγμάτων .
Indeed I grasp the meaning of the riddle.

452	δόλοις ὀλούμεθ’ , ὥσπερ οὖν ἐκτείναμεν .
We are to perish by treachery, just as we committed murder.

453	δοίη τις ἀνδροκμῆτα πέλεκυν ὡς τάχος ·
Someone give me a battle-axe, and quickly!

454	εἰδῶμεν εἰ νικῶμεν , ἢ νικώμεθα ·
Let us know if we are victors or vanquished:

455	ἐνταῦθα γὰρ δὴ τοῦδ’ ἀφικόμην κακοῦ .
for I have even come to this in this wretched business.

456	σὲ καὶ ματεύω ·
It is you I seek.

457	τῷδε δ’ ἀρκούντως ἔχει .
He over there has had enough.

458	οἲ ’γώ .
Oh no!

459	τέθνηκας , φίλτατ’ Αἰγίσθου βία .
My beloved, valiant Aegisthus! You are dead!

460	φιλεῖς τὸν ἄνδρα ;
You love this man?

461	τοιγὰρ ἐν τ- αὐτῷ τάφῳ κείσῃ ·
Then you will lie in the same grave,

462	θανόντα δ’ οὔτι μὴ προδῷς ποτε .
and you will never abandon him in death.

463	ἐπίσχες , ὦ παῖ , τόνδε δ’ αἴδεσαι , τέκνον , μαστόν , πρὸς ᾧ σὺ πολλὰ δὴ βρίζων ἅμα οὔλοισιν ἐξήμελξας εὐτραφὲς γάλα .
Wait, my son! Have pity, child, upon this breast at which many times while you slept you sucked with toothless gums the milk that nourished you.

464	Πυλάδη τί δράσω ;
Pylades, what shall I do?

465	μητέρ’ αἰδεσθῶ κτανεῖν ;
Shall I spare my mother out of pity?

466	ποῦ δὴ τὰ λοιπὰ Λοξίου μαντεύματα τὰ πυθόχρηστα , πιστὰ δ’ εὐορκώματα ;
What then will become in the future of Loxias’ oracles declared at Pytho, and of our sworn pact?

467	ἅπαντας ἐχθροὺς τῶν θεῶν ἡγοῦ πλέον .
Count all men your enemies rather than the gods.

468	κρίνω σὲ νικᾶν , καὶ παραινεῖς μοι καλῶς .
Orestes: I judge you victor: you advise me well.

469	ἕπου , πρὸς αὐτὸν τόνδε σὲ σφάξαι θέλω .
To Clytaemestra: Come, this way! I mean to kill you by his very side.

470	καὶ ζῶντα γάρ νιν κρείσσον’ ἡγήσω πατρός ·
For while he lived, you thought him better than my father.

471	τούτῳ θανοῦσα ξυγκάθευδ’ , ἐπεὶ φιλεῖς τὸν ἄνδρα τοῦτον , ὃν δ’ ἐχρῆν φιλεῖν στυγεῖς .
Sleep with him in death, since you love him but hate the man you were bound to love.

472	ἐγώ σ’ ἔθρεψα , σὺν δὲ γηράναι θέλω .
Clytaemestra: It was I who nourished you, and with you I would grow old.

473	πατροκτονοῦσα γὰρ ξυνοικήσεις ἐμοί ;
Orestes: What! Murder my father and then make your home with me?

474	ἡ Μοῖρα τούτων , ὦ τέκνον , παραιτία .
Clytaemestra: Fate, my child, must share the blame for this.

475	καὶ τόνδε τοίνυν Μοῖρ’ ἐπόρσυνεν μόρον .
Orestes: And fate now brings this destiny to pass.

476	οὐδὲν σεβίζῃ γενεθλίους ἀράς , τέκνον ;
Clytaemestra: Have you no regard for a parent’s curse, my son?

477	τεκοῦσα γάρ μ’ ἔρριψας ἐς τὸ δυστυχές .
Orestes: You brought me to birth and yet you cast me out to misery.

478	οὔτοι σ’ ἀπέρριψ’ εἰς δόμους δορυξένους .
Clytaemestra: No, surely I did not cast you out in sending you to the house of an ally.

479	αἰκῶς ἐπράθην ὢν ἐλευθέρου πατρός .
Orestes: I was sold in disgrace, though I was born of a free father.

467	ἅπαντας ἐχθροὺς τῶν θεῶν ἡγοῦ πλέον .
Count all men your enemies rather than the gods.

468	κρίνω σὲ νικᾶν , καὶ παραινεῖς μοι καλῶς .
Orestes: I judge you victor: you advise me well.

469	ἕπου , πρὸς αὐτὸν τόνδε σὲ σφάξαι θέλω .
To Clytaemestra: Come, this way! I mean to kill you by his very side.

470	καὶ ζῶντα γάρ νιν κρείσσον’ ἡγήσω πατρός ·
For while he lived, you thought him better than my father.

471	τούτῳ θανοῦσα ξυγκάθευδ’ , ἐπεὶ φιλεῖς τὸν ἄνδρα τοῦτον , ὃν δ’ ἐχρῆν φιλεῖν στυγεῖς .
Sleep with him in death, since you love him but hate the man you were bound to love.

472	ἐγώ σ’ ἔθρεψα , σὺν δὲ γηράναι θέλω .
Clytaemestra: It was I who nourished you, and with you I would grow old.

473	πατροκτονοῦσα γὰρ ξυνοικήσεις ἐμοί ;
Orestes: What! Murder my father and then make your home with me?

474	ἡ Μοῖρα τούτων , ὦ τέκνον , παραιτία .
Clytaemestra: Fate, my child, must share the blame for this.

475	καὶ τόνδε τοίνυν Μοῖρ’ ἐπόρσυνεν μόρον .
Orestes: And fate now brings this destiny to pass.

476	οὐδὲν σεβίζῃ γενεθλίους ἀράς , τέκνον ;
Clytaemestra: Have you no regard for a parent’s curse, my son?

477	τεκοῦσα γάρ μ’ ἔρριψας ἐς τὸ δυστυχές .
Orestes: You brought me to birth and yet you cast me out to misery.

478	οὔτοι σ’ ἀπέρριψ’ εἰς δόμους δορυξένους .
Clytaemestra: No, surely I did not cast you out in sending you to the house of an ally.

479	αἰκῶς ἐπράθην ὢν ἐλευθέρου πατρός .
Orestes: I was sold in disgrace, though I was born of a free father.

480	ποῦ δῆθ’ ὁ τῖμος , ὅντιν’ ἀντεδεξάμην ;
Then where is the price I got for you?



481	αἰσχύνομαί σοι τοῦτ’ ὀνειδίσαι σαφῶς .
Orestes: I am ashamed to reproach you with that outright.

482	μὴ ἀλλ’ εἴφ’ ὁμοίως καὶ πατρὸς τοῦ σοῦ μάτας .
Clytaemestra: But do not fail to proclaim the follies of that father of yours as well.

483	μὴ ’λεγχε τὸν πονοῦντ’ ἔσω καθημένη .
Orestes: Do not accuse him who suffered while you sat idle at home.

484	ἄλγος γυναιξὶν ἀνδρὸς εἴργεσθαι , τέκνον .
Clytaemestra: It is a grief for women to be deprived of a husband, my child.

485	τρέφει δέ γ’ ἀνδρὸς μόχθος ἡμένας ἔσω .
Orestes: Yes, but it is the husband’s toil that supports them while they sit at home.

486	κτενεῖν ἔοικας , ὦ τέκνον , τὴν μητέρα .
Clytaemestra: You seem resolved, my child, to kill your mother.

487	σύ τοι σεαυτήν , οὐκ ἐγώ , κατακτενεῖς .
Orestes: You will kill yourself, not I.

488	ὅρα , φύλαξαι μητρὸς ἐγκότους κύνας .
Clytaemestra: Take care: beware the hounds of wrath that avenge a mother.

489	τὰς τοῦ πατρὸς δὲ πῶς φύγω , παρεὶς τάδε ;
Orestes: And how shall I escape my father’s if I leave this undone?

490	ἔοικα θρηνεῖν ζῶσα πρὸς τύμβον μάτην .
Clytaemestra: I see that though living I mourn in vain before a tomb.

491	πατρὸς γὰρ αἶσα τόνδε σ- ὁρίζει μόρον .
Orestes: Yes, for my father’s fate has marked out this destiny for you.

492	οἲ ’γὼ τεκοῦσα τόνδ’ ὄφιν ἐθρεψάμην .
Clytaemestra: Oh no! I myself bore and nourished this serpent!

493	ἦ κάρτα μάντις οὑξ ὀνειράτων φόβος .
Indeed, the fear inspired by the dreams was a true prophecy.

494	ἔκανες ὃν οὐ χρῆν , καὶ τὸ μὴ χρεὼν πάθε .
You did what should not have been done, and you suffer what should not be suffered.

495	στένω μὲν οὖν καὶ τῶνδε συμφορὰν διπλῆν .
So I lament this double calamity.



496	ἐπεὶ δὲ πολλῶν αἱμάτων ἐπήκρισε τλήμων Ὀρέστης , τοῦθ’ ὅμως αἱρούμεθα , ὀφθαλμὸν οἴκων μὴ πανώλεθρον πεσεῖν .
But since Orestes has already shed much blood, we still choose this, that the eye of the house should not utterly perish.

497	ἔμολε μὲν δίκα Πριαμίδαις χρόνῳ , βαρύδικος ποινά ·
As to Priam and his sons justice came at last in crushing retribution, 
498	ἔμολε δ’ ἐς δόμον τὸν Ἀγαμέμνονος διπλοῦς λέων , διπλοῦς Ἄρης .
so to Agamemnon’s house came a twofold lion, twofold slaughter.



499	ἔλασε δ’ ἐς τὸ πᾶν ὁ πυθόχρηστος φυγὰς θεόθεν εὖ φραδαῖσιν ὡρμημένος .
The exile, the suppliant of Pytho, has fulfilled his course to the utmost, justly urged on by counsels from the gods.

500	ἐπολολύξατ’ ὦ δεσποσύνων δόμων ἀναφυγᾶς κακῶν καὶ κτεάνων τριβᾶς ὑπαὶ δυοῖν μιαστόροιν , δυσοίμου τύχας .
Oh raise a shout of triumph over the escape of our master’s house from its misery and the wasting of its wealth by two who were unclean,
its grievous fortune!

501	ἔμολε δ’ ᾧ μέλει κρυπταδίου μάχας δολιόφρων ποινά ·
And he has come whose part is the crafty vengeance of stealthy attack, 


502	ἔθιγε δ’ ἐν μάχᾳ χερὸς ἐτήτυμος Διὸς κόρα — Δίκαν δέ νιν προσαγορεύομεν βροτοὶ τυχόντες καλῶς — ὀλέθριον πνέουσ’ ἐν ἐχθροῖς κότον .
and in the battle his hand was guided by her who is in very truth daughter of Zeus, breathing murderous wrath on her foes.
We mortals aim true to the mark when we call her Justice.

503	ἐπολολύξατ’ ὦ δεσποσύνων δόμων ἀναφυγᾶς κακῶν καὶ κτεάνων τριβᾶς ὑπαὶ δυοῖν μιαστόροιν , δυσοίμου τύχας .
Oh raise a shout of triumph over the escape of our master’s house from its misery and the wasting of its wealth by two who were unclean,
its grievous fortune!

504	τά περ ὁ Λοξίας ὁ Παρνασσίας μέγαν ἔχων μυχὸν χθονὸς ἐπωρθίαξεν ἀδόλως δόλοις βλάβαν ἐγχρονισθεῖσαν ἐποίχεται .
The commands proclaimed loudly by Loxias, tenant of the mighty cavern shrine of Parnassus, assail with guileless guile the mischief now become inveterate. 

505	κρατεῖταί πως τὸ θεῖον παρὰ τὸ μὴ ὑπουργεῖν κακοῖς .
May the divine word prevail that so I may not serve the wicked![*]


506	ἄξια δ’ οὐρανοῦχον ἀρχὰν σέβειν .
It is right to revere the rule of heaven.

507	πάρα τε φῶς ἰδεῖν μέγα τ’ ἀφῃρέθην ψάλιον οἰκέων .
Look, the light has come, and I am freed from the cruel curb that restrained our household. 

508	ἄναγε μὰν δόμοι ·
House, rise up! 

509	πολὺν ἄγαν χρόνον χαμαιπετεῖς ἔκεισθ’ ἀεί .
You have lain too long prostrate on the ground.

510	τάχα δὲ παντελὴς χρόνος ἀμείψεται πρόθυρα δωμάτων , ὅταν ἀφ’ ἑστίας πᾶν ἐλαθῇ μύσος καθαρμοῖσιν ἀτᾶν ἐλατηρίοις .
But soon time that accomplishes all will pass the portals of our house, and then all pollution will be expelled from the hearth by cleansing rites that drive out calamity. 

511	τύχαι δ’ εὐπροσωποκοῖται τὸ πᾶν ἰδεῖν ἀκοῦσαι πρευμενεῖς μετοίκοις δόμων πεσοῦνται πάλιν .
The dice of fortune will turn as they fall and lie
with faces all lovely to behold, favorably disposed to whoever stays in our house.

512	πάρα τε φῶς ἰδεῖν μέγα τ’ ἀφῃρέθην ψάλιον οἰκέων .
Look, the light has come, and I am freed from the cruel curb that restrained our household. 
513	ἄναγε μὰν δόμοι ·
House, rise up! 
514	πολὺν ἄγαν χρόνον χαμαιπετεῖς ἔκεισθ’ ἀεί .
You have lain too long prostrate on the ground.

515	ἴδεσθε χώρας τὴν διπλῆν τυραννίδα πατροκτόνους τε δωμάτων πορθήτορας .
Behold this pair, oppressors of the land, who murdered my father and ransacked my house!

516	σεμνοὶ μὲν ἦσαν ἐν θρόνοις τόθ’ ἥμενοι , φίλοι δὲ καὶ νῦν , ὡς ἐπεικάσαι πάθη πάρεστιν , ὅρκος τ’ ἐμμένει πιστώμασι .
They were majestic then, when they sat on their thrones,
and are lovers even now, as one may judge by what has happened to them, and their oath holds true to their pledges.

517	ξυνώμοσαν μὲν θάνατον ἀθλίῳ πατρὶ καὶ ξυνθανεῖσθαι ·
Together they vowed a league of death against my unhappy father, and together they vowed to die, and they have kept their promise well.

518	καὶ τάδ’ εὐόρκως ἔχει .
And all this they have accomplished in fidelity to their oath.

519	ἴδεσθε δ’ αὖτε , τῶνδ’ ἐπήκοοι κακῶν , τὸ μηχάνημα , δεσμὸν ἀθλίῳ πατρί , πέδας τε χειροῖν καὶ ποδοῖν ξυνωρίδα .
But now look again, you who hear of these evils, at the device, the instrument of bondage for my wretched father, the shackles for his hands and feet.

520	ἐκτείνατ’ αὐτὸ καὶ κύκλῳ παρασταδὸν στέγαστρον ἀνδρὸς δείξαθ’ , ὡς ἴδῃ πατήρ , οὐχ οὑμός , ἀλλ’ ὁ πάντ’ ἐποπτεύων τάδε Ἥλιος , ἄναγνα μητρὸς ἔργα τῆς ἐμῆς , ὡς ἂν παρῇ μοι μάρτυς ἐν δίκῃ ποτέ , ὡς τόνδ’ ἐγὼ μετῆλθον ἐνδίκως μόρον τὸν μητρός ·
Stretch it out and stand around it in a circle to display the covering of the man, that the Father – not mine, but the Sun, who sees all this – may see the abominable work of my mother, so that he may stand as a witness for me in court, when I pursue this just retribution against my mother.

521	Αἰγίσθου γὰρ οὐ λέγω μόρον ·
For I do not speak of Aegisthus’ death;

522	ἔχει γὰρ αἰσχυντῆρος , ὡς νόμος , δίκην ·
he has suffered the penalty prescribed for adulterers.

523	ἥτις δ’ ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ τοῦτ’ ἐμήσατο στύγος , ἐξ οὗ τέκνων ἤνεγχ’ ὑπὸ ζώνην βάρος , φίλον τέως , νῦν δ’ ἐχθρόν , ὡς φαίνει , κακόν , τί σοι δοκεῖ ;
But she who devised this abhorrent deed against her husband, from whom she bore children, a burden once dear but now hateful, as it appears, what do you think of her?

524	μύραινά γ’ εἴτ’ ἔχιδν’ ἔφυ σήπειν θιγοῦσ’ ἂν ἄλλον οὐ δεδηγμένον τόλμης ἕκατι κ- ἐκδίκου φρονήματος .
Had she been born a seasnake or a viper, her very touch, without a bite, would have caused rot due to her shamelessness and immoral disposition.

525	τί νιν προσείπω , κἂν τύχω μάλ’ εὐστομῶν ;
What name shall I give it, even if I were most eloquent?

526	ἄγρευμα θηρός , ἢ νεκροῦ ποδένδυτον δροίτης κατασκήνωμα ;
A trap for a wild beast? Or a shroud for a corpse in his bier, wrapped around his feet?

527	δίκτυον μὲν οὖν , ἄρκυν τ’ ἂν εἴποις καὶ ποδιστῆρας πέπλους .
No, rather it is a net: you might call it a hunting net, or robes to entangle a man’s feet.

528	τοιοῦτον ἂν κτήσαιτο φηλήτης ἀνήρ , ξένων ἀπαιόλημα κ- ἀργυροστερῆ βίον νομίζων , τῷδέ τ’ ἂν δολώματι πολλοὺς ἀναιρῶν πολλὰ θερμαίνοι φρένα .
This would be the kind of thing a highwayman might possess, who deceives strangers and earns his living by robbery, and with this cunning snare he might kill many men and warm his own heart greatly.

529	τοιάδ’ ἐμοὶ ξύνοικος ἐν δόμοισι μὴ γένοιτ’ ·
May such a woman not live with me in my house!

530	ὀλοίμην πρόσθεν ἐκ θεῶν ἄπαις .
Before that may the gods grant me to perish childless!

531	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ μελέων ἔργων ·
Alas! Alas! Sorrowful work!

532	στυγερῷ θανάτῳ διεπράχθης .
You were done in by a wretched death.

533	ἒ ἔ , μίμνοντι δὲ καὶ πάθος ἀνθεῖ .
Alas! Alas! And for the survivor also suffering blossoms.

534	ἔδρασεν ἢ οὐκ ἔδρασε ;
Did she do the deed or not?

535	μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι φᾶρος τόδ’ , ὡς ἔβαψεν Αἰγίσθου ξίφος .
No, this is my witness, dyed by Aegisthus’ sword.

536	φόνου δὲ κηκὶς ξὺν χρόνῳ ξυμβάλλεται , πολλὰς βαφὰς φθείρουσα τοῦ ποικίλματος .
This is a stain of blood that helps time to spoil the many tinctures of embroidered fabric.

537	νῦν αὐτὸν αἰνῶ , νῦν ἀποιμώζω παρών , πατροκτόνον θ’ ὕφασμα προσφωνῶν τόδε .
Now at last I speak his praises. Now at last I am present to lament him, as I address this web that wrought my father’s death.

538	ἀλγῶ μὲν ἔργα καὶ πάθος γένος τε πᾶν , ἄζηλα νίκης τῆσδ’ ἔχων μιάσματα .
Yet I grieve for the deed and the punishment and for my whole clan. My victory is an unenviable pollution.

539	οὔτις μερόπων ἀσινὴς βίοτον διὰ παντὸς ἀπήμον’ ἀμείψει .
No mortal being shall pass his life unscathed, free from all suffering to the end.

540	ἒ ἔ , μόχθος δ’ ὁ μὲν αὐτίχ’ , ὁ δ’ ἥξει .
Alas! Alas! One tribulation comes today, another tomorrow.

541	ἀλλ’ , ὡς ἂν εἰδῆτ’ , οὐ γὰρ οἶδ’ ὅπη τελεῖ , ὥσπερ ξὺν ἵπποις ἡνιοστροφῶ δρόμου ἐξωτέρω ·
But since I would have you know, for I do not know how it will end: I think I am a charioteer driving my team far beyond the course.

542	φέρουσι γὰρ νικώμενον φρένες δύσαρκτοι ·
For my ungoverned wits are whirling me away overmastered.

543	πρὸς δὲ καρδίᾳ φόβος ᾄδειν ἕτοιμος ἠδ’ ὑπορχεῖσθαι κότῳ .
And at my heart fear wishes to sing and dance to a tune of wrath.

544	ἕως δ’ ἔ

τ’ ἔμφρων εἰμί , κηρύσσω φίλοις κτανεῖν τέ φημι μητέρ’ οὐκ ἄνευ δίκης , πατροκτόνον μίασμα καὶ θεῶν στύγος .
But while I am still in my senses, I proclaim to those who hold me dear and declare that not without justice did I slay my mother, the unclean murderess of my father, and a thing loathed by the gods.

545	καὶ φίλτρα τόλμης τῆσδε πλειστηρίζομαι τὸν πυθόμαντιν Λοξίαν , χρήσαντ’ ἐμοὶ πράξαντι μὲν ταῦτ’ ἐκτὸς αἰτίας κακῆς εἶναι , παρέντα δ’ — οὐκ ἐρῶ τὴν ζημίαν ·
And for the spells that gave me the courage for this deed I count Loxias, the prophet of Pytho, my chief source. It was he who declared that, if I did this thing, I would be acquitted of wrongdoing. But if I refrained—I will not name the penalty; for no bowshot could reach such a height of anguish.

546	τόξῳ γὰρ οὔτις πημάτων ἐφίξεται .
For no bowshot could reach such a height of anguish.

547	καὶ νῦν ὁρᾶτέ μ’ , ὡς παρεσκευασμένος ξὺν τῷδε θαλλῷ καὶ στέφει προσίξομαι μεσόμφαλόν θ’ ἵδρυμα , Λοξίου πέδον , πυρός τε φέγγος ἄφθιτον κεκλημένον , φεύγων τόδ’ αἷμα κοινόν ·
And now observe me, how armed with this branch and wreath I go as a suppliant, an outcast for the shedding of kindred blood, to the temple set square on the womb of the earth, the precinct of Loxias, and to the bright fire said to be imperishable.

548	οὐδ’ ἐφ’ ἑστίαν ἄλλην τραπέσθαι Λοξίας ἐφίετο .
To no other hearth did Loxias bid me turn.

549	καὶ μαρτυρεῖν μὲν ὡς ἐπορσύνθη κακὰ τάδ’ ἐν χρόνῳ μοι πάντας Ἀργείους λέγω ·
And as to the manner in which this evil deed was wrought, I charge all men of Argos in time to come to bear me witness.

550	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀλήτης τῆσδε γῆς ἀπόξενος , ζῶν καὶ τεθνηκὼς τάσδε κληδόνας λιπών .
I go forth a wanderer, estranged from this land, leaving this repute behind, in life or death.

551	ἀλλ’ εὖ γ’ ἔπραξας , μηδ’ ἐπιζευχθῇς στόμα φήμῃ πονηρᾷ μηδ’ ἐπιγλωσσῶ κακά , ἐλευθερώσας πᾶσαν Ἀργείων πόλιν , δυοῖν δρακόντοιν εὐπετῶς τεμὼν κάρα .
And you have done well. Therefore do not yoke your tongue to an ill-omened speech, nor let your lips give vent to evil forebodings,
since you have freed the whole realm of Argos by lopping off the heads of two serpents with a fortunate stroke.

552	ἆ , ἆ .
Ah, ah! 

553	δμωαὶ γυναῖκες , αἵδε Γοργόνων δίκην φαιοχίτωνες καὶ πεπλεκτανημέναι πυκνοῖς δράκουσιν ·
You handmaidens, look at them there: like Gorgons, wrapped in sable garments, entwined with swarming snakes!

554	οὐκέτ’ ἂν μείναιμ’ ἐγώ .
I can stay no longer.

555	τίνες σε δόξαι , φίλτατ’ ἀνθρώπων πατρί , στροβοῦσιν ;
Chorus: What fantasies disturb you, dearest of sons to your father?

556	ἴσχε , μὴ φόβου νικῶ πολύ .
Wait, do not be all overcome by fear.

557	οὐκ εἰσὶ δόξαι τῶνδε πημάτων ἐμοί ·
Orestes: To me these are no imagined troubles.

558	σαφῶς γὰρ αἵδε μητρὸς ἔγκοτοι κύνες .
For there indeed are the hounds of wrath to avenge my mother.

559	ποταίνιον γὰρ αἷμά σοι χεροῖν ἔτι ·
Chorus: It is that the blood is still fresh on your hands.

560	ἐκ τῶνδέ τοι ταραγμὸς ἐς φρένας πίτνει .
This is the cause of the disorder that assails your wits.

561	ἄναξ Ἄπολλον , αἵδε πληθύουσι δή , κ- ἐξ ὀμμάτων στάζουσιν αἷμα δυσφιλές .
Orestes: O lord Apollo, look! Now they come in troops, and from their eyes they drip loathsome blood!

562	εἷς σοὶ καθαρμός ·
Chorus: There is one way to cleanse you.

563	Λοξίας δὲ προσθιγὼν ἐλεύθερόν σε τῶνδε πημάτων κτίσει .
The touch of Loxias will set you free from this affliction.

564	ὑμεῖς μὲν οὐχ ὁρᾶτε τάσδ’ , ἐγὼ δ’ ὁρῶ ·
You do not see them, but I see them.

565	ἐλαύνομαι δὲ κ- οὐκέτ’ ἂν μείναιμ’ ἐγώ .
I am pursued and can stay no longer.

566	ἀλλ’ εὐτυχοίης , καί σ’ ἐποπτεύων πρόφρων θεὸς φυλάσσοι καιρίοισι συμφοραῖς .
But may blessings go with you, and may a kind god watch over you with favorable fortunes.

567	ὅδε τοι μελάθροις τοῖς βασιλείοις τρίτος αὖ χειμὼν πνεύσας γονίας ἐτελέσθη .
Now again, for the third time, has the tempest of this royal house run its course.

568	παιδοβόροι μὲν πρῶτον ὑπῆρξαν μόχθοι τάλανές τε Θυέστου ·
First, at the beginning, came the cruel woes of children devoured, and the miserable fate of Thyestes.

569	δεύτερον ἀνδρὸς βασίλεια πάθη ·
Next, the woes of a man, a king.

570	λουτροδάικτος δ’ ὤλετ’ Ἀχαιῶν πολέμαρχος ἀνήρ ·
The warlord of the Achaeans perished, murdered in his bath.

571	νῦν δ’ αὖ τρίτος ἦλθέ ποθεν σωτήρ , ἢ μόρον εἴπω ;
And now, once again, there has come a third, a deliverer, or shall I say, a doom?

572	ποῖ δῆτα κρανεῖ , ποῖ καταλήξει μετακοιμισθὲν μένος ἄτης ;
Oh, where will this fury of calamity, lulled to rest, find an end and cease?