1	Χθονὸς μὲν ἐς τηλουρὸν ἥκομεν πέδον , Σκύθην ἐς οἷμον , ἄβατον εἰς ἐρημίαν .
To earth’s remotest limit we come, to the Scythian land, an untrodden solitude.

2	Ἥφαιστε , σοὶ δὲ χρὴ μέλειν ἐπιστολὰς ἅς σοι πατὴρ ἐφεῖτο , τόνδε πρὸς πέτραις ὑψηλοκρήμνοις τὸν λεωργὸν ὀχμάσαι ἀδαμαντίνων δεσμῶν ἐν ἀρρήκτοις πέδαις .
And now, Hephaestus, yours is the charge to observe the mandates laid upon you by the Father—to clamp this miscreant upon the high craggy rocks in shackles of binding adamant that cannot be broken.

3	τὸ σὸν γὰρ ἄνθος , παντέχνου πυρὸς σέλας , θνητοῖσι κλέψας ὤπασεν .
For your own flower, flashing fire, source of all arts, he has purloined and bestowed upon mortal creatures.

4	τοιᾶσδέ τοι ἁμαρτίας σφε δεῖ θεοῖς δοῦναι δίκην , ὡς ἂν διδαχθῇ τὴν Διὸς τυραννίδα στέργειν , φιλανθρώ

που δὲ παύεσθαι τρόπου .
Such is his offence; for this he is bound to make requital to the gods, so that he may learn to bear with the sovereignty of Zeus and cease his man-loving ways.

5	Κράτος Βία τε , σφῖν μὲν ἐντολὴ Διὸς ἔχει τέλος δὴ κ- οὐδὲν ἐμποδὼν ἔτι ·
Hephaestus: Power and Force, for you indeed the behest of Zeus is now fulfilled, and nothing remains to stop you.

6	ἐγὼ δ’ ἄτολμός εἰμι συγγενῆ θεὸν δῆσαι βίᾳ φάραγγι πρὸς δυσχειμέρῳ .
But for me—I do not have the nerve myself to bind with force a kindred god upon this rocky cleft assailed by cruel winter.

7	πάντως δ’ ἀνάγκη τῶνδέ μοι τόλμαν σχεθεῖν ·
Yet, come what may, I am constrained to summon courage to this deed;

8	ἐξωριάζειν γὰρ πατρὸς λόγους βαρύ .
for it is perilous to disregard the commandments of the Father.

9	τῆς ὀρθοβούλου Θέμιδος αἰπυμῆτα παῖ , ἄκοντά σ’ ἄκων δυσλύτοις χαλκεύμασι προσπασσαλεύσω τῷδ’ ἀπανθρώπ

ῳ πάγῳ ἵν’ οὔτε φωνὴν οὔτε του μορφὴν βροτῶν ὄψει , σταθευτὸς δ’ ἡλίου φοίβῃ φλογὶ χροιᾶς ἀμείψεις ἄνθος .
Lofty-minded son of Themis who counsels straight, against my will, no less than yours, I must rivet you with brazen bonds no hand can loose to this desolate crag, where neither voice nor form of mortal man shall you perceive; but, scorched by the sun’s bright beams, you shall lose the fair bloom of your flesh.

10	ἀσμένῳ δέ σοι ἡ ποικιλείμων νὺξ ἀποκρύψει φάος , πάχνην θ’ ἑῴαν ἥλιος σκεδᾷ πάλιν ·
And glad you shall be when spangled-robed night shall veil his brightness and when the sun shall scatter again the frost of morning.

11	ἀεὶ δὲ τοῦ παρόντος ἀχθηδὼν κακοῦ τρύσει σ’ ·
Evermore the burden of your present ill shall wear you out;

12	ὁ λωφήσων γὰρ οὐ πέφυκέ πω .
for your deliverer is not yet born.

13	τοιαῦτ’ ἐπηύρω τοῦ φιλανθρώπου τρόπου .
Such is the prize you have gained for your championship of man.

14	θεὸς θεῶν γὰρ οὐχ ὑποπτήσσων χόλον βροτοῖσι τιμὰς ὤπασας πέρα δίκης .
For, god though you are, you did not fear the wrath of the gods, but you bestowed honors upon mortal creatures beyond their due.

15	ἀνθ’ ὧν ἀτερπῆ τήνδε φρουρήσεις πέτραν ὀρθοστάδην , ἄυπνος , οὐ κάμπτων γόνυ ·
For these things, you shall keep watch on this joyless rock, standing erect, sleepless, not bending your knee;

16	πολλοὺς δ’ ὀδυρμοὺς καὶ γόους ἀνωφελεῖς φθέγξῃ ·
You will utter many a groan and unavailing lament;

17	Διὸς γὰρ δυσπαραίτητοι φρένες .
For the heart of Zeus is hard;

18	ἅπας δὲ τραχὺς ὅστις ἂν νέον κρατῇ .
and everyone is harsh whose power is new.

19	εἶεν , τί μέλλεις καὶ κατοικτίζῃ μάτην ;
Go, why do you delay and waste pity in vain?

20	τί τὸν θεοῖς ἔχθιστον οὐ στυγεῖς θεόν , ὅστις τὸ σὸν θνητοῖσι προὔδωκεν γέρας ;
Why do you not loathe the god most hated by the gods, who gave away your privilege to mortals?

21	τὸ συγγενές τοι δεινὸν ἥ θ’ ὁμιλία .
Kinship, indeed, is a fearful thing, and so is companionship.

22	σύμφημ’ ·
I agree;

23	ἀνηκουστεῖν δὲ τῶν πα

τρὸς λόγων οἷόν τε πῶς ;
But how can one disregard the commands of the Father?

24	οὐ τοῦτο δειμαίνεις πλέον ;
Do you not fear this more?

25	αἰεί γε δὴ νηλὴς σὺ καὶ θράσους πλέως .
Indeed, you are always unyielding and full of boldness.

26	ἄκος γὰρ οὐδὲν τόνδε θρηνεῖσθαι .
For it avails nothing to lament this fellow.

27	σὺ δὲ τὰ μηδὲν ὠφελοῦντα μὴ πόνει μάτην .
Do not then toil in vain over what is unprofitable.

28	ὦ πολλὰ μισηθεῖσα χειρωναξία .
Oh, how much I hate this craftsmanship!

29	τί νιν στυγεῖς ;
Why do you hate it?

30	πόνων γὰρ ὡς ἁπλῷ λόγῳ τῶν νῦν παρόντων οὐδὲν αἰτία τέχνη .
For, in simple terms, your craft is not to blame for the present pains.

31	ἔμπας τις αὐτὴν ἄλλος ὤφελεν λαχεῖν .
I wish some other had drawn the lot to have it.

32	ἅπαντ’ ἐπαχθῆ πλὴν θεοῖσι κοιρανεῖν ·
All tasks are burdensome, except to rule over gods;

33	ἐλεύθερος γὰρ οὔτις ἐστὶ πλὴν Διός .
For no one is free except Zeus.

34	ἔγνωκα τοῖσδε κ- οὐδὲν ἀντειπεῖν ἔχω .
I am aware of this and have nothing to say against it.

35	οὔκουν ἐπείξῃ τῷδε δεσμὰ περιβαλεῖν , ὡς μή σ’ ἐλινύοντα προσδερχθῇ πατήρ ;
Hurry then to cast the fetters about him, so that the Father does not see you loitering.

36	καὶ δὴ πρόχειρα ψάλια δέρκεσθαι πάρα .
Well, there then! The bands are ready, as you may see.

37	βαλών νιν ἀμφὶ χερσὶν ἐγκρατεῖ σθένει ῥαιστῆρι θεῖνε , πασσάλευε πρὸς πέτραις .
Power: Cast them about his wrists and with might strike with your hammer; rivet him to the rocks.

38	περαίνεται δὴ κ- οὐ ματᾷ τ- ἔργον τόδε .
Hephaestus: There! The work is getting done and not improperly.

39	ἄρασσε μᾶλλον , σφίγγε , μηδαμῇ χάλα .
Power: Strike harder, clamp him tight, leave nothing loose; for he is wondrously clever at finding a way even out of desperate straits.

40	δεινὸς γὰρ εὑρεῖν κ- ἐξ ἀμηχάνων πόρον .
Hephaestus: This arm, at least, is fixed permanently.

41	ἄραρεν ἥδε γ’ ὠλένη δυσεκλύτως .
Power: Now rivet this one too and securely, so that he may learn, for all his cleverness, that he is a fool compared to Zeus.

42	καὶ τήνδε νῦν πόρπασον ἀσφαλῶς , ἵνα μάθῃ σοφιστὴς ὢν Διὸς νωθέστερος .
Hephaestus: None but he could justly blame my work.

43	πλὴν τοῦδ’ ἂν οὐδεὶς ἐνδίκως μέμψαιτό μοι .
Power: Now drive the adamantine wedge’s stubborn edge straight through his chest with your full force.

44	ἀδαμαντίνου νῦν σφηνὸς αὐθάδη γν

άθον στέρνων διαμπὰξ πασσάλευ’ ἐρρωμένως .
Alas, Prometheus, I groan for your sufferings.

45	αἰαῖ , Προμηθεῦ , σῶν ὑπερστένω πόνων .
Power: What! Shrinking again and groaning over the enemies of Zeus? Take care, so that the day does not come when you shall grieve for yourself.

46	σὺ δ’ αὖ κατοκνεῖς τῶν Διός τ’ ἐχθρῶν ὕπερ στένεις ;
Hephaestus: You see a spectacle grievous for eyes to behold.

47	ὅπως μὴ σαυτὸν οἰκτιεῖς ποτε .
Power: I see this man getting his deserts. Come, cast the girths about his sides.

48	ὁρᾷς θέαμα δυσθέατον ὄμμασιν .
Hephaestus: I must do this; spare me your needless ordering.

49	ὁρῶ κυροῦντα τόνδε τῶν ἐπαξίων .
Power: Indeed, I’ll order you, yes and more—I’ll hound you on. Get down below, and ring his legs by force.

50	ἀλλ’ ἀμφὶ πλευραῖς μασχαλιστῆρας βάλε .
Hephaestus: There now! The work’s done and without much labor.

51	δρᾶν ταῦτ’ ἀνάγκη , μηδὲν ἐγκέλευ’ ἄγαν .
Power: Now hammer the piercing fetters with your full force; for the appraiser of our work is severe.

52	ἦ μὴν κελεύσω κ- ἐπιθωύξω γε πρός .
Hephaestus: The utterance of your tongue matches your looks.

53	χώρει κάτω , σκέλη δὲ κίρκωσον βίᾳ .
Power: Be

 softhearted then, but do not attack my stubborn will and my harsh mood.

54	καὶ δὴ πέπρακται τ- ἔργον οὐ μακρῷ πόνῳ .
Hephaestus: There now! The work’s done and without much labor.

55	ἐρρωμένως νῦν θεῖνε διατόρους πέδας ·
Power: Now hammer the piercing fetters with your full force; for the appraiser of our work is severe.

56	ὡς οὑπιτιμητής γε τῶν ἔργων βαρύς .
Hephaestus: The utterance of your tongue matches your looks.

57	ὅμοια μορφῇ γλῶσσά σου γηρύεται .
Power: Be softhearted then, but do not attack my stubborn will and my harsh mood.

58	σὺ μαλθακίζου , τὴν δ’ ἐμὴν αὐθαδίαν ὀργῆς τε τραχύτητα μὴ ’πίπλησσέ μοι .
Hephaestus: Let us be gone, since he has got the fetters on his limbs.

59	στείχωμεν , ὡς κώλοισιν ἀμφίβληστρ’ ἔχει .
Power: There now, indulge your insolence, keep on wresting from the gods their honors to give them to creatures of a day.

60	ἐνταῦθα νῦν ὕβριζε καὶ θεῶν γέρα συλῶν ἐφημέροισι προστίθει .
Are mortals able to lighten your load of sorrow?

61	τί σοι οἷοί τε θνητοὶ τῶνδ’ ἀπαντλῆσαι πόνων ;
Falsely the gods call you Prometheus, for you yourself need forethought to free yourself from this handiwork.

62	ψευδωνύμως σε δαίμονες Προμηθέα καλοῦσιν ·
Falsely the gods call you Prometheus;

63	αὐτὸν γάρ σε δεῖ προμηθέως , ὅτῳ τρόπῳ τῆσδ’ ἐκκυλισθήσῃ τέχνης .
for you yourself need forethought to free yourself from this handiwork.

64	ὦ δῖος αἰθὴρ καὶ ταχύπτεροι πνοαί , ποταμῶν τε πηγαί , ποντίων τε κυμάτων ἀνήριθμον γέλασμα , παμμῆτόρ τε γῆ , καὶ τὸν πανόπτην κύκλον ἡλίου καλῶ .
O divine aether and swift-winged breezes, sources of rivers, and the countless laughter of ocean's waves, universal mother Earth, and you, all-seeing orb of the sun, to you I call!

65	ἴδεσθέ μ’ οἷα πρὸς θεῶν πάσχω θεός .
See what I, a god, endure from the gods.

66	δέρχθηθ’ οἵαις αἰκείαισιν διακναιόμενος τὸν μυριετῆ
Behold with what tortures I am racked, to struggle through the myriad years.

67	χρόνον ἀθλεύσω .
I shall wrestle with time for countless years.

68	τοιόνδ’ ὁ νέος ταγὸς μακάρων ἐξηῦρ’ ἐπ’ ἐμοὶ δεσμὸν ἀεικῆ .
Such is the disgraceful bond the new ruler of the blessed has devised against me.

69	φεῦ φεῦ , τὸ παρὸν τό τ’ ἐπερχόμενον πῆμα στενάχω , πῇ ποτε μόχθων χρὴ τέρματα τῶνδ’ ἐπιτεῖλαι .
Alas! Alas! I lament both the present and the future pain, wondering where the end of these troubles should be.

70	καίτοι τί φημι ;
And yet, what am I saying?

71	πάντα προυξεπίσταμαι σκεθρῶς τὰ μέλλοντ’ , οὐδέ μοι ποταίνιον πῆμ’ οὐδὲν ἥξει .
I know well in advance all that is to come; no affliction will come upon me unforeseen.

72	τὴν πεπρωμένην δὲ χρὴ αἶσαν φέρειν ὡς ῥᾷστα , γιγνώσκονθ’ ὅτι τὸ τῆς ἀνάγκης ἔστ’ ἀδήριτον σθένος .
I must bear my destined fate as easily as possible, knowing that the force of Necessity cannot be resisted.

73	ἀλλ’ οὔτε σιγᾶν οὔτε μὴ σιγᾶν τύχας οἷόν τέ μοι τάσδ’ ἐστί .
Yet neither to speak nor to be silent about my fate is within my power.

74	θνητοῖς γὰρ γέρα πορὼν ἀνάγκαις ταῖσδ’ ἐνέζευγμαι τάλας .
For giving benefits to mortals, I am bound in this miserable yoke of constraint.

75	ναρθηκοπλήρωτον δὲ θηρῶμαι πυρὸς πηγὴν κλοπαίαν , ἣ διδάσκαλος τέχνης πάσης βροτοῖς πέφηνε καὶ μέγας πόρος .
I hunted and stored the stolen source of fire in a fennel stalk, which has become a teacher of every art to mortals and a great resource.

76	τοιῶνδε ποινὰς ἀμπλακημάτων τίνω ὑπαιθρ

ίοις δεσμοῖς πεπασσαλευμένος.
For such offenses, I now pay the penalty, riveted in these open-air bonds.

77	ἆ ἆ ἔα ἔα.
Ah! Ah! Alas! Alas!

78	τίς ἀχώ , τίς ὀδμὰ προσέπτα μ’ ἀφεγγής , θεόσυτος , ἢ βρότειος , ἢ κεκραμένη ;
What is this sound, what scent wafts to me unseen, divine, human, or both?

79	ἵκετο τερμόνιον ἐπὶ πάγον πόνων ἐμῶν θεωρός , ἢ τί δὴ θέλων ;
Has a visitor come to this remote crag to witness my sufferings, or for what purpose?

80	ὁρᾶτε δεσμώτην με δύσποτμον θεόν τὸν Διὸς ἐχθρόν , τὸν πᾶσι θεοῖς
Behold me, an ill-fated god, chained, the foe of Zeus, hated by all the gods...

81	δι’ ἀπεχθείας ἐλθόνθ’ ὁπόσοι τὴν Διὸς αὐλὴν εἰσοιχνεῦσιν , διὰ τὴν λίαν φιλότητα βροτῶν.
...because of my great love for mankind, detested by all who frequent the court of Zeus.

82	φεῦ φεῦ , τί ποτ’ αὖ κινάθισμα κλύω πέλας οἰωνῶν ;
Alas! Alas! What is this rustling noise I hear near, of birds?

83	αἰθὴρ δ’ ἐλαφραῖς πτερύγων ῥιπαῖς ὑποσυρίζει.
The air whispers with the light flutter of wings.

84	πᾶν μοι φοβερὸν τὸ προσέρπον.
Every approach is fearful to me.

85	μηδὲν φοβηθῇς ·
Do not be afraid;

86	φιλία γὰρ ἅδε τάξις πτερύγων θοαῖς ἁμίλλαις προσέβα τόνδε πάγον , πατρῴας μόγις παρειποῦσα φρένας .
for this winged flock comes to you in friendly haste, having just barely persuaded our father.

87	κραιπνοφόροι δέ μ’ ἔπεμψαν αὖραι ·
The swift breezes sent me here;

88	κτύπου γὰρ ἀχὼ χάλυβος διῇξεν ἄντρων μυχόν , ἐκ δ’ ἔπληξέ μου τὰν θεμερῶπιν αἰδῶ ·
for the sound of the hammering drove through the depths of the caves, striking my modesty with horror;

89	σύθην δ’ ἀπέδιλος ὄχῳ πτερωτῷ .
and I hastened here, unsandalled, on a winged chariot.

90	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ , τῆς πολυτέκνου Τηθύος ἔκγονα , τοῦ περὶ πᾶσάν θ’ εἱλισσομένου χθόν’ ἀκοιμήτῳ ῥεύματι παῖδες πατρὸς , Ὠκεανοῦ , δέρχθητ’ , ἐσίδεσθ’ οἵῳ δεσμῷ , προσπορπατὸς τῆσδε φάραγγος σκοπέλοις ἐν ἄκροις φρουρὰν ἄζηλον ὀχήσω .
Alas! Alas! Daughters of the prolific Tethys and of him who encircles the whole earth with his unfailing stream, your father Oceanus, behold, see the kind of fetter by which, at the edge of this ravine, I must keep an unenvied watch.

91	λεύσσω , Προμηθεῦ ·
I see, Prometheus;

92	φοβερὰ δ’ ἐμοῖσιν ὄσσοις ὀμίχλα προσῇξε πλήρης δακρύων σὸν δέμας εἰσιδούσᾳ πέτραις προσαυαινόμενον ταῖσδ’ ἀδαμαντοδέτοισι λύμαις .
and a mist of tears full of dread has spread before my eyes as I behold your body, Prometheus, shriveling on these rocks, fastened by these adamantine bonds.

93	νέοι γὰρ οἰακονόμοι κρατοῦσ’ , Ὀλύμπου ·
For new masters hold the sceptres of Olympus;

94	νεοχμοῖς δὲ δὴ νόμοις Ζεὺς ἀθέτως κρατύνει .
and Zeus in his new-won power strengthens his rule with new laws.

95	τὰ πρὶν δὲ πελώρια νῦν ἀιστοῖ .
He now brings to nothing the previously mighty powers.

96	εἰ γάρ μ’ ὑπὸ γῆν νέρθεν θ’ Ἅιδου τοῦ νεκροδέγμονος εἰς ἀπέρατον Τάρταρον ἧκεν , δεσμοῖς ἀλύτοις ἀγρίως πελάσας , ὡς μήτε θεὸς μήτε τις ἄλλος τοῖσδ’ ἐπεγήθει .
Oh if only he had hurled me below the earth, yes beneath Hades, the entertainer of the dead, into impassable Tartarus, and had ruthlessly fastened me in fetters no hand can loose, so that neither god nor any other might have gloated over this agony I feel!

97	νῦν δ’ αἰθέριον κίνυγμ’ ὁ τάλας ἐχθροῖς ἐπίχαρτα πέπονθα .
But now, a miserable plaything of the winds, I suffer pains to delight my enemies.

98	τίς ὧδε τλησικάρδιος θεῶν , ὅτῳ τάδ’ ἐπιχαρῆ ;
Who of the gods is so hard of heart as to exult in this?

99	τίς οὐ ξυνασχαλᾷ κακοῖς τεοῖσι , δίχα γε Διός ;
Who does not sympathize with your woes—save only Zeus?

100	ὁ δ’ ἐπικότως ἀεὶ θέμενος ἄγναμπτον νόον δάμναται Οὐρανίαν γένναν , οὐδὲ λήξει , πρὶν ἂν ἢ κορέσῃ κέαρ ἢ παλάμ

ᾳ τινὶ τὰν δυσάλωτον ἕλῃ τις ἀρχάν .
But he, ever obstinately set in his wrath, torments the heavenly race, and will not cease until he either satiates his heart or someone by some trick seizes his unassailable power.

101	ἦ μὴν ἔτ’ ἐμοῦ , καίπερ κρατεραῖς ἐν γυιοπέδαις αἰκιζομένου , χρείαν ἕξει μακάρων πρύτανις , δεῖξαι τὸ νέον βούλευμ’ ὑφ’ ὅτου σκῆπτρον τιμάς τ’ ἀποσυλᾶται .
Indeed, the sovereign of the blessed, though I am tortured in these strong fetters, shall have need of me, to reveal the new plan by which he shall be deprived of his scepter and honors.

102	καί μ’ οὔτι μελιγλώσσοις πειθοῦς ἐπαοιδαῖσιν θέλξει , στερεάς τ’ οὔποτ’ ἀπειλὰς πτήξας τόδ’ ἐγὼ καταμηνύσω , πρὶν ἂν ἐξ ἀγρίων δεσμῶν χαλάσῃ ποινάς τε τίνειν τῆσδ’ αἰκείας ἐθελήσῃ .
Nor will he charm me with sweet-tongued persuasions; and I will never, trembling at his firm threats, reveal this secret, until he frees me from these savage bonds and agrees to make amends for this injustice.

103	σὺ μὲν θρασύς τε καὶ πικραῖς δύαισιν οὐδὲν ἐπιχαλᾷς , ἄγαν δ’ ἐλευθεροστομεῖς .
You are bold, and do not yield to your bitter pangs; you give too much license to your tongue.

104	ἐμὰς δ

ὲ φρένας ἐρέθισε διάτορος φόβος ·
But my soul is agitated by piercing fear;

105	δέδια δ’ ἀμφὶ σαῖς τύχαις , πᾷ ποτε τῶνδε πόνων χρή σε τέρμα κέλσαντ’ ἐσιδεῖν ·
and I am in dread about your fate, wondering to what haven you must steer your ship to see an end of your voyage of sorrow.

106	ἀκίχητα γὰρ ἤθεα καὶ κέαρ ἀπαράμυθον ἔχει Κρόνου παῖς .
For the heart of Cronus’ son is hardened against entreaty and his ways are inexorable.

107	οἶδ’ ὅτι τραχὺς καὶ παρ’ ἑαυτῷ τὸ δίκαιον ἔχων Ζεύς .
I know that Zeus is harsh and keeps justice in his own hands;

108	ἀλλ’ ἔμπας ὀίω μαλακογνώμων ἔσται ποθ’ , ὅταν ταύτῃ ῥαισθῇ ·
but nevertheless one day his judgement will soften, when he has been crushed in the way that I know.

109	τὴν δ’ ἀτέραμνον στορέσας ὀργὴν εἰς ἀρθμὸν ἐμοὶ καὶ φιλότητα σπεύδων σπεύδοντί ποθ’ ἥξει .
Then, calming down his stubborn wrath, he shall at last bond with me in union and friendship,
as eager as I am to welcome him.



110	πάντ’ ἐκκάλυψον καὶ γέγων’ ἡμῖν λόγον , ποίῳ λαβών σε Ζεὺς ἐπ’ αἰτιάματι , οὕτως ἀτίμως καὶ πικρῶς αἰκίζεται ·
Unfold the whole story and tell us upon what charge Zeus has caught you and painfully punishes you with such dishonor. 

111	δίδαξον ἡμᾶς , εἴ τι μὴ βλάπτει λόγῳ .
Instruct us, unless, indeed, there is some harm in telling.

112	ἀλγεινὰ μέν μοι καὶ λέγειν ἐστὶν τάδε , ἄλγος δὲ σιγᾶν , πανταχῇ δὲ δύσποτμα .
It is painful for me to relate these things, and painful to keep silent: my condition is miserable in every way.

113	ἐπεὶ τάχιστ’ ἤρξαντο δαίμονες χόλου στάσις τ’ ἐν ἀλλήλοισιν ὠροθύνετο , οἱ μὲν θέλοντες ἐκβαλεῖν ἕδρας Κρόνον , ὡς Ζεὺς ἀνάσσοι δῆθεν , οἱ δὲ τ- ἔμπαλιν σπεύδοντες , ὡς Ζεὺς μήποτ’ ἄρξειεν θεῶν , ἐνταῦθ’ ἐγὼ τὰ λῷστα βουλεύων πιθεῖν Τιτᾶνας , Οὐρανοῦ τε καὶ Χθονὸς τέκνα , οὐκ ἠδυνήθην .
When the gods began to be angry and to come into strife with each other, some wanting to cast Kronos from his seat so that Zeus might rule, and others the opposite, I was unable to persuade the Titans, children of Ouranos and Chthon.

114	αἱμύλας δὲ μηχανὰς ἀτιμάσαντες καρτεροῖς φρονήμασιν ᾤοντ’ ἀμο

χθεὶ πρὸς βίαν τε δεσπόσειν ·
Despising my cunning plans, they thought by brute strength to prevail by force.

115	ἐμοὶ δὲ μήτηρ οὐχ ἅπαξ μόνον Θέμις , καὶ Γαῖα , πολλῶν ὀνομάτων μορφὴ μία , τὸ μέλλον κραίνοιτο προυτεθεσπίκει , ὡς οὐ κατ’ ἰσχὺν οὐδὲ πρὸς τὸ καρτερόν χρείη , δόλῳ δὲ τοὺς ὑπερσχόντας κρατεῖν .
But my mother Themis, and Earth, though one in form they are many-named, had foretold to me how the future would unfold, that it was not by strength and violence, but by guile, that the victors would prevail.

116	τοιαῦτ’ ἐμοῦ λόγοισιν ἐξηγουμένου οὐκ ἠξίωσαν οὐδὲ προσβλέψαι τὸ πᾶν .
They did not value my words, nor did they look at all toward my plan when I laid it out.

117	κράτιστα δή μοι τῶν παρεστώτων τότε ἐφαίνετ’ εἶναι προσλαβόντα μητέρα ἑκόνθ’ ἑκόντ

ι Ζηνὶ συμπαραστατεῖν .
It seemed best to me then, of the courses open, to side with my mother willingly and stand with Zeus.

118	ἐμαῖς δὲ βουλαῖς Ταρτάρου μελαμβαθὴς κευθμὼν καλύπτει τὸν παλαιγενῆ Κρόνον αὐτοῖσι συμμάχοισι .
By my counsels, the deep pit of Tartarus now hides ancient Kronos and his allies within it.

119	τοιάδ’ ἐξ ἐμοῦ ὁ τῶν θεῶν τύραννος ὠφελημένος κακαῖσι ποιναῖς ταῖσδὲ μ’ ἐξημείψατο .
Such is the reward from the tyrant of the gods, who, having benefitted from my help, repaid me with these evil penalties.

120	ἔνεστι γάρ πως τοῦτο τῇ τυραννίδι νόσημα , τοῖς φίλοισι μὴ πεποιθέναι .
For somehow this is the sickness of tyranny, not to trust one's friends.

121	ὃ δ’ οὖν ἐρωτᾶτ’ , αἰτίαν καθ’ ἥντινα αἰκίζεταί με , τοῦτο δὴ σαφηνιῶ .
But as for what you ask, the reason for which I am tormented, I will make it clear.

122	ὅπως τάχιστα τὸν πατρῷον ἐς θρόνον καθέζετ’ , εὐθὺς δαίμοσιν νέμει γέρα ἄλλοισιν ἄλλα καὶ διεστοιχίζετο ἀρχήν ·
As soon as he had seated himself upon his ancestral throne, he immediately began to assign the gods their several privileges and apportioned to them their proper powers.

123	βροτῶν δὲ τῶν ταλαιπώρων λόγον οὐκ ἔσχεν οὐδέν’ , ἀλλ’ ἀιστώσας γένος τὸ πᾶν ἔχρῃζεν ἄλλο φιτῦσαι νέον .
But of wretched mortals he took no notice, desiring to bring the whole race to an end and create a new one in its place.

124	καὶ τοῖσιν οὐδεὶς ἀντέβαινε πλὴν ἐμοῦ .
Against this purpose none dared make stand except me—

125	ἐγὼ δ’ ἐτόλμησ’ ·
I only had the courage;

126	ἐξελυσάμην βροτοὺς τὸ μὴ διαρραισθέντας εἰς Ἅιδου μολεῖν .
I saved mortals so that they did not descend, blasted utterly, to the house of Hades.

127	τῷ τοι τοιαῖσδε πημοναῖσι κάμπτομαι , πάσχειν μὲν ἀλγειναῖσιν , οἰκτραῖσιν δ’ ἰδεῖν ·
For this I am bent by such grievous tortures, painful to suffer, piteous to behold.

128	θνητο

ὺς δ’ ἐν οἴκτῳ προθέμενος , τούτου τυχεῖν οὐκ ἠξιώθην αὐτός , ἀλλὰ νηλεῶς ὧδ’ ἐρρύθμισμαι , Ζηνὶ δυσκλεὲς θέα .
I, who gave mortals first place in my pity, I am deemed unworthy to win this pity for myself, but am in this way mercilessly disciplined, a spectacle that shames Zeus.

129	σιδηρόφρων τε κ- ἐκ πέτρας εἰργασμένος ὅστις , Προμηθεῦ , σοῖσιν οὐ συνασχαλᾷ μόχθοις ·
Iron-hearted and made of stone, Prometheus, is he who feels no compassion at your miseries.

130	ἐγὼ γὰρ οὔτ’ ἂν εἰσιδεῖν τάδε ἔχρῃζον εἰσιδοῦσά τ’ ἠλγύνθην κέαρ .
For myself, I would not have desired to see them; and now that I see them, I am pained at heart.

131	καὶ μὴν φίλοις γ’ ἐλεινὸς εἰσορᾶν ἐγώ .
Indeed, it is a pitiful sight to behold for friends.

132	μή πού τι προύβης τῶνδε καὶ περαιτέρω ;
Did you perhaps transgress even somewhat beyond this offence?

133	θνητούς γ’ ἔπαυσα μὴ προδέρκεσθαι μόρον .
Yes, I caused mortals to cease foreseeing their doom.

134	τὸ ποῖον εὑρὼν τῆσδε φάρμακον νόσου ;
Chorus: Of what sort was the cure that you found for this affliction?

135	τυφλὰς ἐν αὐτοῖς ἐλπίδας κατῴκισα .
Prometheus: I caused blind hopes to dwell within their breasts.

136	μέγ’ ὠφέλημα τοῦτ’ ἐδωρήσω βροτοῖς .
Chorus: A great benefit was this you gave to mortals.

137	πρὸς τοῖσδε μέντοι πῦρ ἐγώ σφιν ὤπασα .
Prometheus: In addition, I gave them fire.

138	καὶ νῦν φλογωπὸν πῦρ ἔχουσ’ ἐφήμεροι ;
Chorus: What! Do creatures of a day now have flame-eyed fire?

139	ἀφ’ οὗ γε πολλὰς ἐκμαθήσονται τέχνας .
Prometheus: Yes, and from it they shall learn many arts.

140	τοιοῖσδε δή σε Ζεὺς ἐπ’ αἰτιάμασιν —
Chorus: Then it was on a charge like this that Zeus—

αἰκίζεταί τε κ- οὐδαμῇ χαλᾷ κακῶν .
Prometheus: Torments me and in no way gives me respite from pain.

141	οὐδ’ ἔστιν ἄθλου τέρμα σοι προκείμενον ;
Chorus: And is there no end assigned to your ordeal?

142	οὐκ ἄλλο γ’ οὐδέν , πλὴν ὅταν κείνῳ δοκῇ .
Prometheus: No, none except when it seems good to him.

143	δόξει δὲ πῶς ;
Chorus: But how will it seem good to him? What hope is there?

144	τίς ἐλπίς ;
Prometheus: Do you not see that you have wronged?

145	οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι ἥμαρτες ;
Chorus: Do you not see that you have wronged?

146	ὡς δ’ ἥμαρτες οὔτ’ ἐμοὶ λέγειν καθ’ ἡδονὴν σοί τ’ ἄλγος .
And yet it is not pleasant for me to talk about how you have wronged, and for you it is pain. So, let us quit this theme; and may you seek some release from your ordeal.

147	ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν μεθῶμεν , ἄθλου δ’ ἔκλυσιν ζήτει τινά .
Prometheus: It is easy for him who keeps his foot free from harm to counsel and admonish him who is in misery. I have known this all the while. Of my own will, yes, of my own will I erred—I will not deny it. By helping mortals I found suffering for myself;

148	ἐλαφρὸν ὅστις πημάτων ἔξω πόδα ἔχει παραινεῖν νουθετεῖν τε τὸν κακῶς πράσσοντ’ ·
nevertheless I did not think I would be punished in this way—wasting away upon cliffs in mid-air, my portion this desolate and dreary crag. 

149	ἐγὼ δὲ ταῦθ’ ἅπαντ’ ἠπιστάμην .
And now, bewail no more my present woes; alight on the ground and listen to my oncoming fortunes so that you may be told them from end to end. Consent, I beg you, oh consent. 

150	ἑκὼν ἑκὼν ἥμαρτον , οὐκ ἀρνήσομαι ·
Take part in the trouble of him who is now in sore distress. 

151	θνητοῖς ἀρήγων αὐτὸς ηὑρόμην πόνους .
In truth, affliction wanders impartially abroad and alights upon all in turn.

152	οὐ μήν τι ποιναῖς γ’ ᾠόμην τοίαισί με κατισχνανεῖσθαι πρὸς πέτραις πεδαρσίοις , τυχόντ’ ἐρήμου τοῦδ’ ἀγείτονος πάγου .
Chorus: Not to unwilling ears have you made this appeal, Prometheus.

153	καί μοι τὰ μὲν παρόντα μὴ δύρεσθ’ ἄχη , πέδοι δὲ βᾶσαι τὰς προσερπούσας τύχας ἀκούσαθ’ , ὡς μάθητε διὰ τέλους τὸ πᾶν .
And so now with light foot I will quit my swift-speeding seat and the pure air, the pathway of birds and draw near to this rugged ground; for I want to hear the whole story of your sorrows.

154	πίθεσθέ μοι πίθεσθε , συμπονήσατε τῷ νῦν μογοῦντι .
Enter Oceanus on a winged steed

155	τ- αὐτά τοι πλανωμένη πρὸς ἄλλοτ’ ἄλλον πημονὴ προσιζάνει .
Oceanus: I have come to the end of a long journey in my passage to you, Prometheus, guiding by my own will, without a bridle, this swift-winged bird.

156	οὐκ ἀκούσαις ἐπεθώυξας τοῦτο , Προμηθεῦ .
For your fate, you may be sure, I feel compassion. Kinship, I think, constrains me to this; and, apart from blood ties, there is none to whom I should pay greater respect than to you.

157	καὶ νῦν ἐλαφρῷ ποδὶ κραιπνόσυτον θᾶκον προλιποῦσ’ , αἰθέρα θ’ ἁγνὸν πόρον οἰωνῶν , ὀκριοέσσῃ χθονὶ τῇδε πελῶ , τοὺς σοὺς δὲ πόνους χρῄζω διὰ παντὸς ἀκοῦσαι .
You shall know this for simple truth and that it is not in me to utter vain and empty words; come, tell me; what aid can I render you? For you shall never say that you have a friend more loyal than Oceanus.

158	ἥκω δολιχῆς τέρμα κελεύθου διαμειψάμενος πρὸς σέ , Προμηθεῦ , τὸν πτερυγωκῆ τόνδ’ οἰωνὸν γνώμῃ στομίων ἄτερ εὐθύνων ·
I have come to the end of a long journey in my passage to you, Prometheus, guiding by my own will, without a bridle, this swift-winged bird.

159	ταῖς σαῖς δὲ τύχαις , ἴσθι , συναλγῶ .
For your fate, you may be sure, I feel compassion.

160	τὸ τε γάρ με , δοκῶ , συγγενὲς οὕτως ἐσαναγκάζει , χωρίς τε γένους οὐκ ἔστιν ὅτῳ μείζονα μοῖραν νείμαιμ’ ἢ σοί .
Kinship, I think, constrains me to this; and, apart from blood ties, there is none to whom I should pay greater respect than to you.

161	γνώσῃ δὲ τάδ’ ὡς ἔτυμ’ , οὐδὲ μάτην χαριτογλωσσεῖν ἔνι μοι ·
You shall know this for simple truth and that it is not in me to utter vain and empty words;

162	φέρε γὰρ σήμαιν’ ὅ τι χρή σοι συμπράσσειν ·
come, tell me; what aid can I render you?

163	οὐ γάρ ποτ’ ἐρεῖς ὡς Ὠκεανοῦ φίλος ἐστὶ βεβαιότερός σοι .
For you shall never say that you have a friend more loyal than Oceanus.

164	ἔα ·
Stop!

165	τί χρῆμα λεύσσω ;
What do I see?

166	καὶ σὺ δὴ πόνων ἐμῶν ἥκεις ἐπόπτης ;
And have you come to witness my sufferings?

167	πῶς ἐτόλμησας , λιπὼν ἐπώνυμόν τε ῥεῦμα καὶ πετρηρεφῆ αὐτόκτιτ’ ἄντρα , τὴν σιδηρομήτορα ἐλθεῖν ἐς αἶαν ;
How dared you leave the stream that bears your name and the caves carved from rock to come to this iron-bound land?

168	ἦ θεωρήσων τύχας ἐμὰς ἀφῖξαι καὶ συνασχαλῶν κακοῖς ;
Have you come to gaze upon my fate and sympathize with my sufferings?

169	δέρκου θέαμα , τόνδε τὸν Διὸς φίλον , τὸν συγκαταστήσαντα τὴν τυραννίδα , οἵαις ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ πημοναῖσι κάμπτομαι .
Behold the spectacle, me, Zeus' friend, who helped establish his tyranny, now bent by his tortures.

170	ὁρῶ , Προμηθεῦ , καὶ παραινέσαι γέ σοι θέλω τὰ λῷστα , καίπερ ὄντι ποικίλῳ .
I see, Prometheus, and I wish to offer you the best advice, though you are cunning.

171	γίγνωσκε σαυτὸν καὶ μεθάρμοσαι τρόπους νέους ·
Know yourself and change to new ways;

172	νέος γὰρ καὶ τύραννος ἐν θεοῖς .
for a new and tyrannical power rules among the gods.

173	εἰ δ’ ὧδε τραχεῖς καὶ τεθηγμένους λόγους ῥίψεις , τάχ’ ἄν σου καὶ μακρὰν ἀνωτέρω θακῶν κλύοι Ζεύ

ς , ὥστε σοι τὸν νῦν ὄχλον παρόντα μόχθων παιδιὰν εἶναι δοκεῖν .
If you hurl forth such harsh and sharp words, Zeus, though throned far above, may hear, and your present multitude of sorrows will seem child's play.

174	ἀλλ’ , ὦ ταλαίπωρ’ , ἃς ἔχεις ὀργὰς ἄφες , ζήτει δὲ τῶνδε πημάτων ἀπαλλαγάς .
But, oh wretched one, let go of your anger and seek a release from these miseries.

175	ἀρχαῖ’ ἴσως σοι φαίνομαι λέγειν τάδε ·
Perhaps I seem to you to speak old-fashioned words;

176	τοιαῦτα μέντοι τῆς ἄγαν ὑψηγόρου γλώσσης , Προμηθεῦ , τ- ἐπίχειρα γίγνεται .
Yet, Prometheus, such is the outcome of your excessively proud speech.

177	σὺ δ’ οὐδέπω ταπεινὸς οὐδ’ εἴκεις κακοῖς , πρὸς τοῖς παροῦσι δ’ ἄλλα προσλαβεῖν θέλεις .
You are not yet humble, nor do you yield to misfortunes, but wish to add more to those you have.

178	οὔκουν ἔμοιγε χρώμενος διδασκάλῳ πρὸς κέντρα κῶλον ἐκτενεῖς , ὁρῶν ὅτι τραχὺς μόναρχος οὐδ’ ὑπεύθυνος κρατεῖ .
Yet you, using me as your teacher, stretch yourself against the goads, seeing that a harsh monarch, who answers to no one, rules.

179	καὶ νῦν ἐγὼ μὲν εἶμι καὶ πειράσομαι ἐὰν δύνωμαι τῶνδέ σ’ ἐκλῦσαι πόνων

.
And now I will go and attempt, if I can, to release you from these pains.

180	σὺ δ’ ἡσύχαζε μηδ’ ἄγαν λαβροστόμει .
But you should stay calm and not be too outspoken.

181	ἢ οὐκ οἶσθ’ ἀκριβῶς ὢν περισσόφρων ὅτι γλώσσῃ ματαίᾳ ζημία προστρίβεται ;
Or do you not know precisely, being so very wise, that a pointless tongue invites punishment?

182	ζηλῶ σ’ ὁθούνεκ’ ἐκτὸς αἰτίας κυρεῖς τούτων μετασχεῖν καὶ τετολμηκὼς ἐμοί .
I envy you for being involved in these matters without cause and for daring on my behalf.

183	καὶ νῦν ἔασον μηδέ σοι μελησάτω .
But now leave it be and let it not concern you.

184	πάντως γὰρ οὐ πείσεις νιν ·
For you will certainly not persuade him;

185	οὐ γὰρ εὐπιθής .
he is not easily persuaded.

186	πάπταινε δ’ αὐτὸς μή τι πημανθῇς ὁδῷ .
But beware yourself lest you suffer any harm by this course.

187	πολλῷ γ’ ἀμείνων τοὺς πέλας φρενοῦν ἔφυς ἢ σαυτόν ·
Indeed, you were born much better at advising others than yourself;

188	ἔργῳ κ- οὐ λόγῳ τεκμαίρομαι .
I judge by deeds, not words.

189	ὁρμώμενον δὲ μηδαμῶς ἀντισπάσῃς .
Do not in any way pull back one who is eager to go.

190	αὐχῶ γὰρ αὐχῶ τήνδε δωρεὰν ἐμοὶ δώσειν Δί’ , ὥστε τῶνδέ σ’ ἐκλῦσαι πόνων .
For I am confident, yes, confident, that Zeus will grant me this boon, to free you from your sufferings.

191	τὰ μὲν σ’ ἐπαινῶ κ- οὐδαμῇ λήξω ποτέ ·
I praise you for this and will never cease to do so;

192	προθυμίας γὰρ οὐδὲν ἐλλείπεις .
for you lack nothing in eagerness.

193	ἀτὰρ μηδὲν πόνει .
But do not toil in vain.

194	μάτην γὰρ οὐδὲν ὠφελῶν ἐμοὶ πονήσεις , εἴ τι καὶ πονεῖν θέλεις .
For you will toil in vain without helping me, even if you want to toil.

195	ἀλλ’ ἡσύχαζε σαυτὸν ἐκποδὼν ἔχων ·
Instead, keep yourself out of trouble;

196	ἐγὼ γὰρ οὐκ , εἰ δυστυχῶ , τοῦδ’ εἵνεκα θέλοιμ’ ἂν ὡς πλείστοισι πημονὰς τυχεῖν .
for I would not wish, in my misfortune, that many others should suffer because of me.

197	οὐ δῆτ’ ἐπεί με καὶ κασιγνήτου τύχαι τείρουσ’ Ἄτλαντος , ὃς πρὸς ἑσπέρους τόπους ἕστηκε κίον’ οὐρανοῦ τε καὶ χθονὸς ὤμοις ἐρείδων , ἄχθος οὐκ εὐάγκαλον .
Indeed, besides myself, the fate of my brother Atlas torments me. He stands at the western edges, bearing on his shoulders the pillar of heaven and earth, a burden not easy to bear.

198	τὸν γηγενῆ τε Κιλικίων οἰκήτορα ἄντρων ἰδὼν ᾤκτιρα , δάιον τέρας ἑκατογκάρανον πρὸς βίαν χειρούμενον Τυφῶνα θοῦρον ·
And I pity the earth-born inhabitant of the Cilician caves, the terrible monster, hundred-headed Typhon, who resisted the gods;

199	πᾶσιν ὅς ἀντέστη θεο

ῖς , σμερδναῖσι γαμφηλαῖσι συρίζων φόβον ·
who opposed all gods, hissing out terror with his dreadful jaws;

200	ἐξ ὀμμάτων δ’ ἤστραπτε γοργωπὸν σέλας , ὡς τὴν Διὸς τυραννίδ’ ἐκπέρσων βίᾳ ·
from whose eyes flashed a frightful fire, as if he would violently overpower the sovereignty of Zeus;

201	ἀλλ’ ἦλθεν αὐτῷ Ζηνὸς ἄγρυπνον βέλος , καταιβάτης κεραυνὸς ἐκπνέων φλόγα , ὃς αὐτὸν ἐξέπληξε τῶν ὑψηγόρων κομπασμάτων .
But against him came Zeus' unwearying bolt, the downward-smiting lightning breathing flame, which struck him from his lofty boasting;

202	φρένας γὰρ εἰς αὐτὰς τυπεὶς ἐφεψαλώθη κ- ἐξεβροντήθη σθένος .
for smitten in his very soul, he was crippled, and his strength was thundered away.

203	καὶ νῦν ἀχρεῖον καὶ παράορον δέμας κεῖται στενωποῦ πλησίον θαλασσίου ἰπούμενος ῥίζαισιν Αἰτναίαις ὕπο ·
And now he lies, a useless and motionless form, near the narrows of the sea, beneath the roots of Aetna;

204	κορυφαῖς δ’ ἐν ἄκραις ἥμενος μυδροκτυπεῖ Ἥφαιστος ·
and on the high summit sits Hephaestus, hammering the molten ore;

205	ἔνθεν ἐκραγήσονταί ποτε ποταμοὶ πυρὸς δάπτοντες ἀγρίαις γνάθοις τῆς καλλικάρπου Σικελίας λευροὺς γύας ·
from there shall one day burst forth rivers

 of fire, devouring with savage jaws the fair fields of fruitful Sicily;

206	τοιόνδε Τυφὼς ἐξαναζέσει χόλον θερμοῖς ἀπλάτου βέλεσι πυρπνόου ζάλης , καίπερ κεραυνῷ Ζηνὸς ἠνθρακωμένος .
such fiery wrath will Typho send forth, boiling with hot, unquenchable darts of fire-breathing storm, even though he is thunder-struck by Zeus.

207	σὺ δ’ οὐκ ἄπειρος , οὐδ’ ἐμοῦ διδασκάλου χρῄζεις ·
But you are not inexperienced, nor do you need instruction from me;

208	σεαυτὸν σῷζ’ ὅπως ἐπίστασαι ·
save yourself in the way you know best;

209	ἐγὼ δὲ τὴν παροῦσαν ἀντλήσω τύχην , ἔστ’ ἂν Διὸς φρόνημα λωφήσῃ χόλου .
I will endure my present fate until the time when Zeus's mood shall abate from his anger.

210	οὔκουν , Προμηθεῦ , τοῦτο γιγνώσκεις , ὅτι ὀργῆς νοσούσης εἰσὶν ἰατροὶ λόγοι ;
Do you not know, Prometheus, that words are the physicians of a diseased temper?

211	ἐάν τις ἐν καιρῷ γε μαλθάσσῃ κέαρ καὶ μὴ σφριγῶντα θυμὸν ἰσχναίνῃ βίᾳ .
If someone in due time soothes the heart and does not in anger thin his spirit by force.

212	ἐν τῷ προθυμεῖσθαι δὲ καὶ τολμᾶν τίνα ὁρᾷς ἐνοῦσαν ζημίαν ;
In the act of being eager and daring, do you see any harm lurking?

213	δίδασκέ με .
Teach me.

214	μόχθον περισσὸν κουφόνουν τ’ εὐηθίαν .
I see this as unnecessary labor and thoughtless simplicity.

215	ἔα με τῇδε τῇ νόσῳ νοσεῖν , ἐπεὶ κέρδιστον εὖ φρονοῦντα μὴ φρονεῖν δοκεῖν .
Let me suffer this illness, since it seems most profitable to be thought unwise while being wise.

216	ἐμὸν δοκήσει τ- ἀμπλάκημʼ εἶναι τόδε .
I consider this my misfortune.

217	σαφῶς μ’ ἐς οἶκον σὸς λόγος στέλλει πάλιν .
Your words clearly send me back home.

218	μὴ γάρ σε θρῆνος ὁ- ἐμὸς εἰς ἔχθραν βάλῃ .
Lest my lamentation make you an enemy.

219	ἦ τῷ νέον θακοῦντι παγκρατεῖς ἕδρας ;
Is it that you fear the newly enthroned almighty?

220	τούτου φυλάσσου μή ποτ’ ἀχθεσθῇ κέαρ .
Beware lest his heart ever becomes vexed with you.

221	ἡ σή , Προμηθεῦ , συμφορὰ διδάσκαλος .
Your misfortune, Prometheus, is my teacher.

222	στέλλου , κομίζου , σῷζε τὸν παρόντα νοῦν .
Go, preserve, save your present wisdom.

223	ὁρμωμένῳ μοι τόνδ’ ἐθώυξας λόγον .
You have hastened this word for my eagerness.

224	λευρὸν γὰρ οἷμον αἰθέρος ψαίρει πτεροῖς τετρασκελὴς οἰωνός ·
For the four-footed bird sweeps the smooth path of the air with its wings;

225	ἄσμενος δέ τ- ἂν σταθμοῖς ἐν οἰκείοισι κάμψειεν γόνυ .
and he will gladly bend his knee in his own stables.

226	στένω σε τᾶς οὐλομένας τύχας , Προμηθεῦ ·
I mourn your unfortunate fate, Prometheus.

227	δακρυσίστακτα δ’ ἀπ’ ὄσσων ῥαδινὰν λειβομένα ῥέος παρειὰν νοτίοις ἔτεγξα παγαῖς ·
Shedding from my eyes a coursing flood of tears I wet my tender cheeks with their moist streams.

228	ἀμέγαρτα γὰρ τάδε Ζεὺς ἰδίοις νόμοις κρατύνων ὑπερήφανον θεοῖς τοῖς πάρος ἐνδείκνυσιν αἰχμάν.
For Zeus, holding this unenviable power by self-appointed laws, displays towards the gods of old an overweening spirit.

229	πρόπασα δ’ ἤδη στονόεν λέλακε χώρα, μεγαλοσχήμονά ἀρχαιοπρεπῆ στένουσι τὰν σὰν ξυνομαιμόνων τε τιμάν, ὁπόσοι τ’ ἔποικον ἁγνᾶς Ἀσίας ἕδος νέμονται, μεγαλοστόνοισι σοῖς πήμασι συγκάμνουσι θνατοί.
Now the whole earth cries aloud in lamentation, lamenting the greatness of your time-honored honor, the honor that was yours and your brother’s; and all mortals who dwell in the holy land of Asia share the anguish of your most lamentable suffering.

230	Κολχίδος τε γᾶς ἔνοικοι παρθένοι, μάχας ἄτρεστοι, καὶ Σκύθης ὅμιλος, οἳ γᾶς ἔσχατον τόπον ἀμφὶ Μαιῶτιν ἔχουσι λί

μναν,
And the inhabitants of the land of Colchis, maidens fearless in battle, and the Scythian tribe who dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth near the Maeotic lake,

231	Ἀραβίας τ’ ἄρειον ἄνθος, ὑψίκρημνον οἳ πόλισμα Καυκάσου πέλας νέμονται, δάιος στρατός, ὀξυπρῴροισι βρέμων ἐν αἰχμαῖς.
and the warlike flower of Arabia, who dwell near the high-cragged citadel of the Caucasus, a fierce army roaring with sharp-pointed spears.

232	μόνον δὴ πρόσθεν ἄλλον ἐν πόνοις δαμέντ’ ἀδαμαντοδέτοις Τιτᾶνα λύμαις εἰσιδόμαν, θεόν, Ἄτλαντος αἰὲν;
Did I see another Titan god before this, enthralled in torment by adamantine bonds—Atlas, forever?

233	ὑπέροχον σθένος κραταιόν, ὃς οὐράνιόν τε πόλον νώτοις στέγων ὑποστενάζει.
Mighty in strength, who groans as he supports the vault of heaven on his shoulders.

234	βοᾷ δὲ πόντιος κλύδων ξυμπίτνων, στένει βυθός, κελαινὸς δ’ Ἄιδος ὑποβρέμει μυχὸς γᾶς, παγαί θ’ ἁγνορύτων ποταμῶν στένουσιν ἄλγος οἰκτρόν.
The waves of the sea cry out as they clash, the deep moans, the dark abyss of Hades rumbles beneath the earth, and the springs of pure-flowing rivers lament his piteous pain.

235	μή τοι χλιδῇ δοκεῖτε μηδ’ αὐθαδίᾳ σιγᾶν με;
Do not think that I am silent out of arrogance or haughtiness.

236	συννοίᾳ δὲ δάπτομαι κέαρ, ὁρῶν ἐμαυτὸν ὧδε προυσελούμενον.
But my heart is devoured by sorrow, seeing myself so maltreated.

237	καίτοι θεοῖσι τοῖς νέοις τούτοις γέρα τίς ἄλλος ἢ ’γὼ παντελῶς διώρισεν;
Yet who else but I completely marked out the privileges for these new gods?

238	ἀλλ’ αὐτὰ σιγῶ ·
Yet I am silent;

239	καὶ γὰρ εἰδυίαισιν ἂν ὑμῖν λέγοιμι ·
for I would be telling you things you already know;

240	τ- ἐν βροτοῖς δὲ πήματα ἀκούσαθ’, ὥς σφας νηπίους ὄντας τὸ πρὶν ἔννους ἔθηκα καὶ φρενῶν ἐπηβόλους.
but listen to the miseries of mortals, how I made them, previously senseless, sensible and endowed with reason.

241	λέξω δέ, μέμψιν οὔτιν’ ἀνθρώποις ἔχων, ἀλλ’ ὧν δέδωκ’ εὔνοιαν ἐξηγούμενος ·
I will tell, not to reproach mankind, but to explain the good will I have shown them;

242	οἳ πρῶτα μὲν βλέποντες ἔβλεπον μάτην, κλύοντες οὐκ ἤκουον, ἀλλ’ ὀνειράτων ἀλίγκιοι μορφαῖσι τὸν μακρὸν βίον ἔφυρον εἰκῇ πάντα, κ- οὔτε πλινθυφεῖς δόμους προσείλους, ᾖσαν, οὐ ξυλουργίαν ·
They had eyes but saw in vain, ears but did not hear; like shapes in dreams, throughout their long life they wrought everything in confusion, they had neither knowledge of houses built of bricks and turned to face the sun, nor yet of work in wood;

243	κατώρυχες δ’ ἔναιον ὥστ’ ἀήσυροι μύρμηκες ἄντρων ἐν μυχοῖς ἀνηλίοις.
but dwelt beneath the ground like swarming ants, in sunless caves.

244 ἦν δ’ οὐδὲν αὐτοῖς οὔτε χείματος τέκμαρ οὔτ’ ἀνθεμώδους ἦρος οὔτε καρπίμου θέρους βέβαιον , ἀλλ’ ἄτερ γνώμης τὸ πᾶν ἔπρασσον , ἔστε δή σφιν ἀντολὰς ἐγὼ ἄστρων ἔδειξα τάς τε δυσκρίτους δύσεις .
Before, they had nothing; neither sign of winter, nor of flowery spring, nor of fruitful summer on which they could rely; they did everything without judgment, until I showed them the risings and settings of the stars, hard to discern.

245	καὶ μὴν ἀριθμόν , ἔξοχον σοφισμάτων , ἐξηῦρον αὐτοῖς , γραμμάτων τε συνθέσεις , μνήμην ἁπάντων , μουσομήτορ’ ἐργάνην .
Yes, and numbers, too, chiefest of sciences, I invented for them, and the combining of letters, creative mother of the Muses’ arts, with which to hold all things in memory.

246	κ- ἔζευξα πρῶτος ἐν ζυγοῖσι κνώδαλα ζεύγλαισι δουλεύοντα σάγμασὶν θ’ , ὅπως θνητοῖς μεγίστων διάδοχοι μοχθημάτων γένοινθ’ , ὑφ’ ἅρμα τ’ ἤγαγον φιληνίους ἵππους , ἄγαλμα τῆς ὑπερπλούτου χλιδῆς .
I, too, first brought brute beasts beneath the yoke to be subject to the collar and the pack-saddle, so that they might bear in men’s stead their heaviest burdens; and to the chariot I harnessed horses and made them obedient to the rein, to be an image of wealth and luxury.

247	θαλασσόπλαγκτα δ’ οὔτις ἄλλος ἀντ’ ἐμοῦ λινόπτερ’ ηὗρε ναυτίλων ὀχήματα .
It was I and no one else who invented the mariner’s flaxen-winged car that roams the sea.

248	τοιαῦτα μηχανήματ’ ἐξευρὼν τάλας βροτοῖσιν , αὐτὸς οὐκ ἔχω σόφισμ’ ὅτῳ τῆς νῦν παρούσης πημονῆς ἀπαλλαγῶ .
Wretched that I am—such are the arts I devised for mankind, yet have myself no cunning means to rid me of my present suffering.

249	πέπονθας αἰκὲς πῆμ’ ·
You have suffered sorrow and humiliation.

250	ἀποσφαλεὶς φρενῶν πλανᾷ , κακὸς δ’ ἰατρὸς ὥς τις ἐς νόσον

250	ἀποσφαλεὶς φρενῶν πλανᾷ , κακὸς δ’ ἰατρὸς ὥς τις ἐς νόσον πεσὼν ἀθυμεῖς καὶ σεαυτὸν οὐκ ἔχεις εὑρεῖν ὁποίοις φαρμάκοις ἰάσιμος .
You have lost your wits and have gone astray; and, like an unskilled doctor, fallen ill, you lose heart and cannot discover by which remedies to cure your own disease.

251	τὰ λοιπά μου κλύουσα θαυμάσῃ πλέον , οἵας τέχνας τε καὶ πόρους ἐμησάμην .
Hear the rest and you shall wonder the more at the arts and resources I devised.

252	τὸ μὲν μέγιστον , εἴ τις ἐς νόσον πέσοι , οὐκ ἦν ἀλέξημ’ οὐδέν , οὔτε βρώσιμον , οὐ χριστόν , οὐδὲ πιστόν , ἀλλὰ φαρμάκων χρείᾳ κατεσκέλλοντο , πρίν γ’ ἐγώ σφισιν ἔδειξα κράσεις ἠπίων ἀκεσμάτων , αἷς τὰς ἁπάσας ἐξαμύνονται νόσους .
This first and foremost: if ever man fell ill, there was no defence—no healing food, no ointment, nor any drink—but for lack of medicine they wasted away, until I showed them how to mix soothing remedies with which they now ward off all their disorders.

253	τρόπους τε πολλοὺς μαντικῆς ἐστοίχισα , κ

253	τρόπους τε πολλοὺς μαντικῆς ἐστοίχισα , κ- ἔκρινα πρῶτος ἐξ ὀνειράτων ἃ χρὴ ὕπαρ γενέσθαι , κληδόνας τε δυσκρίτους ἐγνώρισ’ αὐτοῖς ἐνοδίους τε συμβόλους ·
And I marked out many ways by which they might read the future, and among dreams I first discerned which are destined to come true; and voices baffling interpretation I explained to them, and signs from chance meetings.

254	γαμψωνύχων τε πτῆσιν οἰωνῶν σκεθρῶς διώρισ’ , οἵτινές τε δεξιοὶ φύσιν εὐωνύμους τε , καὶ δίαιταν ἥντινα ἔχουσ’ ἕκαστοι , καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους τίνες ἔχθραι τε καὶ στέργηθρα καὶ συνεδρίαι ·
The flight of crook-taloned birds I distinguished clearly— which by nature are auspicious, which sinister—their various modes of life, their mutual feuds and loves, and their consortings.

255	σπλάγχνων τε λειότητα , καὶ χροιὰν τίνα ἔχουσ’ ἂν εἴη δαίμοσιν πρὸς ἡδονὴν χολή , λοβοῦ τε ποικίλην εὐμορφίαν .
And the smoothness of their entrails, and what color the gall must have to please the gods, also the speckled symmetry of the liver-lobe.

245	καὶ μὴν ἀριθμόν, ἔξοχον σοφισμάτων, ἐξηῦρον αὐτοῖς, γραμμάτων τε συνθέσεις, μνήμην ἁπάντων, μουσομήτορ’ ἐργάνην.
Yes, and numbers, too, chiefest of sciences, I invented for them, and the combining of letters, creative mother of the Muses’ arts, with which to hold all things in memory.

246	κ- ἔζευξα πρῶτος ἐν ζυγοῖσι κνώδαλα ζεύγλαισι δουλεύοντα σάγμασὶν θ’, ὅπως θνητοῖς μεγίστων διάδοχοι μοχθημάτων γένοινθ’, ὑφ’ ἅρμα τ’ ἤγαγον φιληνίους ἵππους, ἄγαλμα τῆς ὑπερπλούτου χλιδῆς.
I, too, first brought brute beasts beneath the yoke to be subject to the collar and the pack-saddle, so that they might bear in men’s stead their heaviest burdens; and to the chariot I harnessed horses and made them obedient to the rein, to be an image of wealth and luxury.

247	θαλασσόπλαγκτα δ’ οὔτις ἄλλος ἀντ’ ἐμοῦ λινόπτερ’ ηὗρε ναυτίλων ὀχήματα.
It was I and no one else who invented the mariner’s flaxen-winged car that roams the sea.

248	τοιαῦτα μηχανήματ’ ἐξευρὼν τάλας βροτοῖσιν, αὐτὸς οὐκ ἔχω σόφισμ’ ὅτῳ τῆς νῦν παρούσης πημονῆς ἀπαλλαγῶ.
Wretched that I am—such are the arts I devised for mankind, yet have myself no cunning means to rid me of my present suffering.

249	πέπονθας αἰκὲς πῆμ’ ·
You have suffered sorrow and humiliation.

250	ἀποσφαλεὶς φρενῶν πλανᾷ, κακὸς δ’ ἰατρὸς ὥς τις ἐς νόσον πεσὼν ἀθυμε

ῖς καὶ σεαυτὸν οὐκ ἔχεις εὑρεῖν ὁποίοις φαρμάκοις ἰάσιμος.
You have lost your wits and have gone astray; and, like an unskilled doctor, fallen ill, you lose heart and cannot discover by which remedies to cure your own disease.

251	τὰ λοιπά μου κλύουσα θαυμάσῃ πλέον, οἵας τέχνας τε καὶ πόρους ἐμησάμην.
Hear the rest and you shall wonder the more at the arts and resources I devised.

252	τὸ μὲν μέγιστον, εἴ τις ἐς νόσον πέσοι, οὐκ ἦν ἀλέξημ’ οὐδέν, οὔτε βρώσιμον, οὐ χριστόν, οὐδὲ πιστόν, ἀλλὰ φαρμάκων χρείᾳ κατεσκέλλοντο, πρίν γ’ ἐγώ σφισιν ἔδειξα κράσεις ἠπίων ἀκεσμάτων, αἷς τὰς ἁπάσας ἐξαμύνονται νόσους.
This first and foremost: if ever man fell ill, there was no defence—no healing food, no ointment, nor any drink—but for lack of medicine they wasted away, until I showed them how to mix soothing remedies with which they now ward off all their disorders.

253	τρόπους τε πολλοὺς μαντικῆς ἐστοίχισα, κ- ἔκρινα πρῶτος ἐξ ὀνειράτων ἃ χρὴ ὕπαρ γενέσθαι, κληδόνας τε δυσκρίτους ἐγνώρισ’ αὐτοῖς ἐνοδίους τε συμβόλους ·
And I marked out many ways by which they might read the future, and among dreams I first discerned which are destined to come true; and voices baffling interpretation I explained to them, and signs from chance meetings. 

254	γαμψωνύχων τε πτῆσιν οἰωνῶν σκεθρῶς διώρισ’, οἵτινές τε δε

ξιοὶ φύσιν εὐωνύμους τε, καὶ δίαιταν ἥντινα ἔχουσ’ ἕκαστοι, καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους τίνες ἔχθραι τε καὶ στέργηθρα καὶ συνεδρίαι.
The flight of crook-taloned birds I distinguished clearly— which by nature are auspicious, which sinister—their various modes of life, their mutual feuds and loves, and their consortings.

255	σπλάγχνων τε λειότητα, καὶ χροιὰν τίνα ἔχουσ’ ἂν εἴη δαίμοσιν πρὸς ἡδονὴν χολή, λοβοῦ τε ποικίλην εὐμορφίαν.
And the smoothness of their entrails, and what color the gall must have to please the gods, also the speckled symmetry of the liver-lobe.

256	κνίσῃ τε κῶλα συγκαλυπτὰ καὶ μακρὰν ὀσφῦν πυρώσας δυστέκμαρτον ἐς τέχνην ὥδωσα θνητούς, καὶ φλογωπὰ σήματα ἐξωμμάτωσα, πρόσθεν ὄντ’ ἐπάργεμα.
I burned and initiated mankind into an occult art; and the thigh-bones, wrapped in fat, and the long chine I burned and initiated mankind into an occult art. Also I cleared their vision to discern signs from flames,which were obscure before this.

257	τοιαῦτα μὲν δὴ ταῦτ’;
Enough about these arts.

258	ἔνερθε δὲ χθονὸς κεκρυμμέν’, ἀνθρώποισιν ὠφελήματα, χαλκόν, σίδηρον, ἄργυρον, χρυσόν τε τίς φήσειεν ἂν πάροιθεν ἐξευρεῖν ἐμοῦ;
Now as to the benefits to men that lay concealed beneath the earth—bronze, iron, silver, and gold—who would claim to have discovered them before me?

259	οὐδείς, σάφ’ οἶδα, μὴ μάτην φλύσαι θέλων.
No one, I know full well, unless he likes to babble idly.


260 βραχεῖ δὲ μύθῳ πάντα συλλήβδην μάθε , πᾶσαι τέχναι βροτοῖσιν ἐκ Προμηθέως .
Hear the sum of the whole matter in the compass of one brief word—every art possessed by man comes from Prometheus.

261 μή νυν βροτοὺς μὲν ὠφέλει καιροῦ πέρα , σαυτοῦ δ’ ἀκήδει δυστυχοῦντος .
Do not benefit mortals beyond reason and disregard your own distress; 

262 ὡς ἐγὼ εὔελπίς εἰμι τῶνδέ σ’ ἐκ δεσμῶν ἔτι λυθέντα μηδὲν μεῖον ἰσχύσειν Διός .
although I am confident that you will be freed from these bonds and will have power in no way inferior to Zeus.

263	οὐ ταῦτα ταύτῃ Μοῖρά πω τελεσφόρος κρᾶναι πέπρωται , μυρίαις δὲ πημοναῖς δύαις τε καμφθεὶς ὧδε δεσμὰ φυγγάνω ·
Not in this way is Fate, who brings all to fulfillment, destined to complete this course. Only when I have been bent by pangs and tortures infinite am I to escape my bondage.

264	τέχνη δ’ ἀνάγκης ἀσθενεστέρα μακρῷ .
Skill is weaker by far than Necessity.

265	τίς οὖν ἀνάγκης ἐστὶν οἰακοστρόφος ;
Who then is the helmsman of Necessity?

266	Μοῖραι τρίμορφοι μνήμονές τ’ Ἐρινύες τούτων ἄρα Ζεύς ἐστιν ἀσθενέστερος ;
The three-shaped Fates and mindful Furies.

267	οὔκουν ἂν ἐκφύγοι γε τὴν πεπρωμένην .
Prometheus: Yes, in that even he cannot escape what is foretold.

268	τί γὰρ πέπρωται Ζηνὶ πλὴν ἀεὶ κρατεῖν ;
Chorus: Why, what is fated for Zeus except to hold eternal sway?

269	τοῦτ’ οὐκέτ’ ἂν πύθοιο μηδὲ λιπάρει .
Prometheus: This you must not learn yet; do not be over-eager.

270	ἦ πού τι σεμνόν ἐστιν ὃ ξυναμπέχεις .
Chorus: It is some solemn secret, surely, that you enshroud in mystery.

271	ἄλλου λόγου μέμνησθε , τόνδε δ’ οὐδαμῶς καιρὸς γεγωνεῖν , ἀλλὰ συγκαλυπτέος ὅσον μάλιστα ·
Prometheus: Think of some other subject, for it is not the proper time to speak of this. No matter what, this must be kept concealed; for it is by safeguarding it that I am to escape my dishonorable bonds and outrage.

272	τόνδε γὰρ σῴζων ἐγὼ δεσμοὺς ἀεικεῖς καὶ δύας ἐκφυγγάνω .
Chorus: May Zeus, who apportions everything, never set his power in conflict with my will, nor may I be slow to approach the gods, with holy sacrifices of oxen slain, by the side of the ceaseless stream of Oceanus, my father; and may I not offend in speech; but may this rule abide in my heart and never fade away.

273	μηδάμ’ ὁ πάντα νέμων θεῖτ’ ἐμᾷ γνώμᾳ κράτος ἀντίπαλον Ζεύς , μηδ’ ἐλινύσαιμι θεοὺς ὁσίαις θοίναις ποτινισομένα βουφόνοις παρ’ Ὠκεανοῦ πατρὸς ἄσβεστον πόρον , μηδ’ ἀλίτοιμι λόγοις ·
Chorus: Sweet it is to pass all the length of life amid confident hopes, feeding the heart in glad festivities. But I shudder as I look on you, racked by infinite tortures. You have no fear of Zeus, Prometheus, but in self-will you reverence mortals too much.

274	ἀλλά μοι τόδ’ ἐμμένοι καὶ μήποτ’ ἐκτακείη ·
Chorus: Come, my friend, how mutual was your reciprocity? Tell me, what kind of help is there in creatures of a day? What aid? Did you not see the helpless infirmity, no better than a dream, in which the blind generation of men is shackled? Never shall the counsels of mortal men transgress the ordering of Zeus.

275	ἁδύ τι θαρσαλέαις τὸν μακρὸν τείνειν βίον ἐλπίσι , φαναῖς θυμὸν ἀλδαίνουσαν ἐν εὐφροσύναις .
Chorus: I have learned this lesson from observing the luck, Prometheus, that has brought about your ruin. And the difference in the song stole into my thought—this song and that, which, about your bridal bed and bath, I raised to grace your marriage, when you wooed with gifts and won my sister Hesione to be your wedded wife.

276	φρίσσω δέ σε δερκομένα μυρίοις μόχθοις διακναιόμενον .
Prometheus: Can it be that Zeus has less power than they do?

277	Ζῆνα γὰρ οὐ τρομέων ἰδίᾳ γνώμᾳ σέβῃ θνατοὺς ἄγαν , Προμηθεῦ .
Chorus: Yes, in that even he cannot escape what is foretold.

278	φέρ’ , ὅπως ἄχαρις χάρις , ὦ φίλος ·
Chorus: Why, what is fated for Zeus except to hold eternal sway?

279	εἰπὲ ποῦ τίς ἀλκά ;
Chorus: This you must not learn yet; do not be over-eager.

280	τίς ἐφαμερίων ἄρηξις ;
Chorus: It is some solemn secret, surely, that you enshroud in mystery.

281	οὐδ’ ἐδέρχθης ὀλιγοδρανίαν ἄκικυν , ἰσόνειρον , ᾇ τὸ φωτῶν ἀλαὸν γένος ἐμπεποδισμένον ;
Chorus: Think of some other subject, for it is not the proper time to speak of this. No matter what, this must be kept concealed; for it is by safeguarding it that I am to escape my dishonorable bonds and outrage.

282	οὔποτε τὰν Διὸς ἁρμονίαν θνατῶν παρεξίασι βουλαί .
Chorus: May Zeus, who apportions everything, never set his power in conflict with my will, nor may I be slow to approach the gods, with holy sacrifices of oxen slain, by the side of the ceaseless stream of Oceanus, my father; and may I not offend in speech; but may this rule abide in my heart and never fade away.

283	ἔμαθον τάδε σὰς προσιδοῦσ’ ὀλοὰς τύχας , Προμηθεῦ .
Chorus: Sweet it is to pass all the length of life amid confident hopes, feeding the heart in glad festivities. But I shudder as I look on you, racked by infinite tortures. You have no fear of Zeus, Prometheus, but in self-will you reverence mortals too much.

284	τὸ διαμφίδιον δέ μοι μέλος προσέπτα τόδ’ ἐκεῖνό θ’ , ὅ τ’ ἀμφὶ λουτρὰ καὶ λέχος σὸν ὑμεναίουν ἰότατι γάμων , ὅτε τὰν ὁμοπάτριον ἕδνοις ἄγαγες Ἡσιόναν πείθὼν δάμαρτα κοινόλεκτρον .
Chorus: Come, my friend, how mutual was your reciprocity? Tell me, what kind of help is there in creatures of a day? What aid? Did you not see the helpless infirmity, no better than a dream, in which the blind generation of men is shackled? Never shall the counsels of mortal men transgress the ordering of Zeus.

285	τίς γῆ ;
What land is this? 

286	τί γένος ;
What people? 

287	τίνα φῶ λεύσσειν τόνδε χαλινοῖς ἐν πετρίνοισιν χειμαζόμενον ;
By what name am I to call the one I see exposed to the tempest in bonds of rock? 

288	τίνος ἀμπλακίας ποινὰς ὀλέκῃ ;
What offence have you committed that as punishment you are doomed to destruction?

289	σήμηνον ὅποι γῆς ἡ μογερὰ πεπλάνημαι .
Tell me to what region of the earth I have wandered in my wretchedness?





290	ἆ ἆ , ἒ ἔ , χρίει τις αὖ με τὰν τάλαιναν οἶστρος , εἴδωλον Ἄργου γηγενοῦς , ἄλευ’ ἆ δᾶ ·	
Oh, oh! Aah! Aah! A gad-fly, phantom of earth-born Argus is stinging me again! Keep him away, O Earth!

291	φοβοῦμαι τὸν μυριωπὸν εἰσορῶσα βούταν.
I am fearful when I behold that myriad-eyed herdsman.

292	ὁ δὲ πορεύεται δόλιον ὄμμ’ ἔχων, ὃν οὐδὲ κατθανόντα γαῖα κεύθει.
He travels onward with his crafty gaze upon me; not even in death does the earth conceal him.

293	ἀλλ’, ἐμὲ τὰν τάλαιναν ἐξ ἐνέρων περῶν κυναγετεῖ, πλανᾷ τε νῆστιν ἀνὰ τὰν παραλίαν ψάμμαν.
But he, from the underworld, hounds me, the unfortunate one, and drives me famished along the sands of the seashore.

294	ὑπὸ δὲ κηρόπλαστος ὀτοβεῖ δόναξ ἀχέτας ὑπνοδόταν νόμον.
The waxen pipe drones forth in accompaniment a clear-sounding slumberous strain.

295	ἰὼ ἰὼ πόποι, ποῖ μ’ ἄγουσι τηλέπλαγκτοι πλάναι?
Alas, alas! Where is my far-roaming wandering course taking me?

296	τί ποτέ μ’, ὦ Κρόνιε παῖ, τί ποτε ταῖσδ’ ἐνέζευξας εὑρὼν ἁμαρτοῦσαν ἐν πημοναῖσιν?
In what, O son of Cronus, in what have you found offense so that you have bound me to this yoke of misery?

297	ἓ ἕ, οἰστρηλάτῳ δὲ δείματι δειλαίαν παράκοπον ὧδε τείρεις?
Aah, are you harassing a wretched maiden to frenzy by this terror of the pursuing gadfly?

298	πυρί με φλέξον, ἢ χθονὶ κάλυψον, ἤ ποντίοις δάκεσι δὸς βοράν, μηδέ μοι φθονήσῃς εὐγμάτων, ἄναξ.
Consume me with fire, or hide me in the earth, or give me to the monsters of the deep to devour; but do not grudge, O Lord, the favor that I pray for.

299	ἄδην με πολύπλανοι πλάν

299	ἄδην με πολύπλανοι πλάναι γεγυμνάκασιν, οὐδ’ ἔχω μαθεῖν ὅπα πημονὰς ἀλύξω.
My far-roaming wanderings have taught me enough, and I cannot discern how to escape my sufferings.

300	κλύεις φθέγμα τᾶς βούκερω παρθένου;
Do you hear the voice of the horned virgin?

301	πῶς δ’ οὐ κλύω τῆς οἰστροδινήτου κόρης, τῆς Ἰναχείας;
Prometheus: How can I fail to hear the maiden frenzied by the gadfly, the daughter of Inachus?

302	ἣ Διὸς θάλπει κέαρ ἔρωτι, καὶ νῦν τοὺς ὑπερμήκεις δρόμους Ἥρᾳ στυγητὸς πρὸς βίαν γυμνάζεται.
It is she who fires the heart of Zeus with passion, and now, through Hera’s hate, is disciplined by force with interminable wandering.

303	πόθεν ἐμοῦ σὺ πατρὸς ὄνομ’ ἀπύεις;
Io: Why do you call my father’s name? 

304	εἰπέ μοι τᾷ μογερᾷ τίς ὤν;
Tell me, the unfortunate maid, who you are?

305	τίς ἄρα μ’, ὦ τάλας, τὰν τάλαιναν ὧδ’ ἔτυμα προσθροεῖς;
Unhappy wretch, that you thus correctly address the miserable maiden?

306	θεόσυτόν τε νόσον ὠνόμασας, ἃ μαραίνει με χρίουσα κέντροις, ἰώ, φοιταλέοισιν ἓ ἕ;
You have named the heaven-sent plague that wastes and stings me with its maddening goad.

307	σκιρτημάτων δὲ νήστισιν αἰκείαις λαβρόσυτος ἦλθον, Ἥρας ἐπικότοισι μήδεσι δαμεῖσα.
Ah me! In frenzied bounds I come, driven by torturing hunger, victim of Hera’s vengeful purpose.

308	δυσδαιμόνων δὲ τίνες οἵ, ἓ ἕ, οἷ’ ἐγὼ μογοῦσιν;
Who of the

308	δυσδαιμόνων δὲ τίνες οἵ, ἓ ἕ, οἷ’ ἐγὼ μογοῦσιν;
Who of the company of the unfortunate endures—aah! aah!—sufferings such as mine?

309	ἀλλά μοι τορῶς τέκμηρον ὅ τι μ’ ἐπαμμένει παθεῖν, τί μῆχαρ, ἢ τί φάρμακον νόσου, δεῖξον, εἴπερ οἶσθα;
Oh make it clear to me what misery I am fated to suffer, what remedy is there, what cure, for my affliction. Reveal it, if you have the knowledge.

310	θρόει, φράζε τᾷ δυσπλάνῳ παρθένῳ.
You will not then do this favor for me?

311	λέξω τορῶς σοι πᾶν ὅπερ χρῄζεις μαθεῖν, οὐκ ἐμπλέκων αἰνίγματ’, ἀλλ’ ἁπλῷ λόγῳ, ὥσπερ δίκαιον πρὸς φίλους οἴγειν στόμα.
Prometheus: Say what it is you wish; for you can learn all from me.

312	πυρὸς βροτοῖς δοτῆρ’ ὁρᾷς Προμηθέα.
Look, I whom you see am Prometheus, who gave fire to mankind.

313	ὦ κοινὸν ὠφέλημα θνητοῖσιν φανείς, τλῆμον Προμηθεῦ, τοῦ δίκην πάσχεις τάδε;
Io: O you who have shown yourself a common benefactor of mankind, wretched Prometheus, why do you suffer so?

314	ἁρμοῖ πέπαυμαι τοὺς ἐμοὺς θρηνῶν πόνους.
Prometheus: I have only just now finished lamenting my own calamities.

315	οὔκουν πόροις ἂν τήνδε δωρεὰν ἐμοί;
Io: You will not then do this favor for me?

316	λέγ’ ἥντιν’ αἰτῇ ·
Prometheus: Say what it is you wish; for you can learn all from me.

317	πᾶν γὰρ ἂν πύθοιό μου.
Io: Tell me who has bound you fast in this ravine.

318	σήμηνον ὅστις ἐν φάραγγί σ’ ὤχμασεν.
Prometheus: Zeus by his will, Hephaestus by his hand.

319	βούλευμα μὲν τὸ Δῖον, Ἡφαίστου δὲ χείρ.
Prometheus: Zeus by his will, Hephaestus by his hand.

320	ποινὰς δὲ ποίων ἀμπλακημάτων τίνεις;
Io: And for what offence do you pay the penalty?

321	τοσοῦτον ἀρκῶ σοι σαφηνίσας μόνον

Prometheus: It suffices that I have made clear to you this much and no more.

322	καὶ πρός γε τούτοις τέρμα τῆς ἐμῆς πλάνης δεῖξον, τίς ἔσται τῇ ταλαιπώρῳ χρόνος.
Io: No, also tell me the end of my wandering—what time is set for wretched me.

323	τὸ μὴ μαθεῖν σοι κρεῖσσον ἢ μαθεῖν τάδε.
Prometheus: It would be better not to know than to know, in your case.

324	μήτοι με κρύψῃς τοῦθ’ ὅπερ μέλλω παθεῖν.
Io: I beg you, do not hide from me what I am doomed to suffer.

325	ἀλλ’ οὐ μεγαίρω τοῦδέ σοι δωρήματος.
Prometheus: No, it is not that I do not want to grant your request.

326	τί δῆτα μέλλεις μὴ οὐ γεγωνίσκειν τὸ πᾶν;
Io: Why then your reluctance to tell me everything?

327	φθόνος μὲν οὐδείς, σὰς δ’ ὀκνῶ θράξαι φρένας.
Prometheus: I am not unwilling; but I hesitate to crush your spirit.

328	μή μου προκήδου μᾶσσον ὡς ἐμοὶ γλυκύ.
Io: Do not be more kind to me than I myself desire.

329	ἐπεὶ προθυμῇ, χρὴ λέγειν.
Prometheus: Since you insist, I must speak. Listen, then.

330	ἄκουε δή.
Chorus: No, not yet. Grant us too a portion of the pleasure.

331	μήπω γε ·
Chorus: No, not yet. Grant us too a portion of the pleasure.

332	μοῖραν δ’ ἡδονῆς κ- ἐμοὶ πόρε.
Chorus: Let us first inquire the story of her affliction and let her with her own lips relate the events that brought horrid calamity upon her. 

333	τὴν τῆσδε πρῶτον ἱστορήσωμεν νόσον, αὐτῆς λεγούσης τὰς πολυφθόρους τύχας ·
Chorus: Let us first inquire the story of her affliction and let her with her own lips relate the events that brought horrid calamity upon her.

334	τὰ λοιπὰ δ’ ἄθλων σοῦ διδαχθήτω πάρα.
Chorus: Then let her be instructed by you as to the toils still to come.

335	σὸν ἔργον, Ἰοῖ, ταῖσδ’ ὑπουργῆσαι χάριν, ἄλλως τε πάντως καὶ κασιγνήταις πατρός.
Chorus: It is for you, Io, to grant them this favor, especially since they are your father’s sisters.

336	ὡς τ- ἀποκλαῦσαι κ- ἀποδύρασθαι τύχας ἐνταῦθ’, ὅπου μέλλοι τις οἴσεσθαι δάκρυ πρὸς τῶν κλυόντων, ἀξίαν τριβὴν ἔχει.
Chorus: For it is worthwhile to indulge in weeping and in wailing over evil fortunes when one is likely to win the tribute of a tear from the listener.

337 οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅπως ὑμῖν ἀπιστῆσαί με χρή, σαφεῖ δὲ μύθῳ πᾶν ὅπερ προσχρῄζετε πεύσεσθε ·
Io: I do not know how to refuse you. You shall learn in truthful speech all that you would like to know.

338 καίτοι καὶ λέγουσ’ αἰσχύνομαι θεόσσυτον χειμῶνα καὶ διαφθορὰν μορφῆς, ὅθεν μοι σχετλίᾳ προσέπτατο.
Io: Yet I am ashamed to tell about the storm of calamity sent by Heaven, of the marring of my form, and of the source from which it swooped upon me, wretched that I am.

339 αἰεὶ γὰρ ὄψεις ἔννυχοι πωλεύμεναι ἐς παρθενῶνας τοὺς ἐμοὺς παρηγόρουν λείοισι μύθοις ὦ μέγ’ εὔδαιμον κόρη, τί παρθενεύει δαρόν, ἐξόν σοι γάμου τυχεῖν μεγίστου;
Io: For visions of the night, always haunting my maiden chamber, sought to beguile me with seductive words, saying: "O damsel greatly blessed of fortune, why linger in your maidenhood so long when it is within your power to win a union of the highest?"

340 Ζεὺς γὰρ ἱμέρου βέλει πρὸς σοῦ τέθαλπται καὶ συναίρεσθαι Κύπριν θέλει ·
Io: "Zeus is inflamed by passion’s dart for you and is eager to unite with you in love."

341	σὺ δ’, ὦ παῖ, μὴ ’πολακτίσῃς λέχος τὸ Ζηνός, ἀλλ’ ἔξελθε πρὸς Λέρνης βαθὺν λειμῶνα, ποίμνας βουστάσεις τε πρὸς πατρός, ὡς ἂν τὸ Δῖον ὄμμα λωφήσῃ πόθου.
Io: "Do not, my child, spurn the bed of Zeus, but go forth to Lerna’s meadow land of pastures deep and to your father’s flocks and where his cattle feed, so that the eye of Zeus may find respite from its longing."

342	τοιοῖσδε πάσας εὐφρόνας ὀνείρασι συνειχόμην δύστηνος, ἔστε δὴ πατρὶ ἔτλην γεγωνεῖν νυκτίφοιτ’ ὀνείρατα.
Io: "By such dreams was I, to my distress, beset night after night, until at last I gained courage to tell my father of the dreams that haunted me."

343	ὁ δ’ ἔς τε Πυθὼ κ- ἐπὶ Δωδώνης πυκνοὺς θεοπρόπους ἴαλλεν, ὡς μάθοι τί χρὴ δρῶντ’ ἢ λέγοντα δαίμοσιν πράσσειν φίλα.
Io: "And he sent many a messenger to Pytho and Dodona so that he might discover what deed or word of his would find favor with the gods."

344	ἧκον δ’ ἀναγγέλλοντες αἰολοστόμους χρησμοὺς ἀσήμους δυσκρίτως τ’ εἰρημένους.
Io: "But they returned with report of oracles, riddling, obscure, and darkly worded."

345	τέλος δ’ ἐναργὴς βάξις ἦλθεν Ἰνάχῳ σαφῶς ἐπισκήπτουσα καὶ μυθουμένη ἔξω δόμων τε καὶ πάτρας ὠθεῖν ἐμέ, ἄφετον ἀλ

345	τέλος δ’ ἐναργὴς βάξις ἦλθεν Ἰνάχῳ σαφῶς ἐπισκήπτουσα καὶ μυθουμένη ἔξω δόμων τε καὶ πάτρας ὠθεῖν ἐμέ, ἄφετον ἀλᾶσθαι γῆς ἐπ’ ἐσχάτοις ὅροις ·
Io: "Then at last there came an unmistakable utterance to Inachus, charging and commanding him clearly that he must thrust me forth from home and native land to roam at large to the remotest confines of the earth;"

346	κ- εἰ μὴ θέλοι, πυρωπὸν ἐκ Διὸς μολεῖν κεραυνόν, ὃς πᾶν ἐξαϊστώσοι γένος.
Io: "and, if he would not, a fiery thunderbolt would come from Zeus that would utterly destroy his whole race."

347	τοιοῖσδε πεισθεὶς Λοξίου μαντεύμασιν ἐξήλασέν με κ- ἀπέκλῃσε δωμάτων ἄκουσαν ἄκων ·
Io: "Yielding obedience to such prophetic utterances of Loxias, he drove me away and barred me from his house, against his will and mine;"

348	ἀλλ’ ἐπηνάγκαζέ νιν Διὸς χαλινὸς πρὸς βίαν πράσσειν τάδε.
Io: "but the constraint of Zeus forced him to act by necessity."

349	εὐθὺς δὲ μορφὴ καὶ φρένες διάστροφοι ἦσαν, κεραστὶς δ’, ὡς ὁρᾶτ’, ὀξυστόμῳ μύωπι χρισθεῖσ’ ἐμμανεῖ σκιρτήματι ᾖσσον πρὸς εὔποτόν τε Κερχνείας ῥέος Λέρνης τε κρήνην ·
Io: "Immediately my form and mind were distorted, and with horns, as you see, upon my forehead, stung by a sharp-fanged gadfly I rushed with frantic bounds to Cerchnea’s sweet stream and Lerna’s spring."

350	βουκόλος δὲ γηγενὴς ἄκρατος ὀργὴν Ἄργος ὡμάρτει, πυκνοῖς ὄσ

350	βουκόλος δὲ γηγενὴς ἄκρατος ὀργὴν Ἄργος ὡμάρτει, πυκνοῖς ὄσσοις δεδορκὼς τοὺς ἐμοὺς κατὰ στίβους.
Io: "But Argus, the earth-born herdsman, untempered in his rage, pursued me, peering with his many eyes upon my steps."

351	ἀπροσδόκητος δ’ αὐτὸν ἀφνίδιος μόρος τοῦ ζῆν ἀπεστέρησεν.
Io: "A sudden death robbed him of life unexpectedly;"

352	οἰστροπλὴξ δ’ ἐγὼ μάστιγι θείᾳ γῆν πρὸ γῆς ἐλαύνομαι.
Io: "while I, still tormented by the gadfly, am driven on from land to land before the heaven-sent plague."

353	κλύεις τὰ πραχθέντ’, ἐάν τι πρότερον ἀλλόκοτον ἤκουσας.
Io: "That is what happened; if you have heard anything earlier and different."

354	εἰ δ’ ἔχεις εἰπεῖν ὅ τι λοιπὸν πόνων, σήμαινε·
Io: "But if you know of any toils that remain, tell me;"

355	μηδέ μ’ οἰκτίσας ξύνθαλπε μύθοις ψευδέσιν.
Io: "and do not, out of pity, cheer me with false tales;"

356	νόσημα γὰρ αἴσχιστον εἶναί φημι συνθέτους λόγους.
Io: "for I consider false words to be the foulest sickness."

357 ἔα ἔα , ἄπεχε , φεῦ ·
Io: "Oh, ah, go away, alas!"

358 οὔποτ’ οὔποτ’ ηὔχουν ὧδε ξένους μολεῖσθαι λόγους εἰς ἀκοὰν ἐμάν , οὐδ’ ὧδε δυσθέατα καὶ δύσοιστα πήματα , λύματα , δείματα ἀμφάκει κέντρῳ τύψειν ψυχὰν ἐμάν .
Io: "Never, oh never, did I dream that words so strange would greet my ears, nor that sufferings so grievous to look upon, yes, and so grievous to endure, a tale of outrage, would strike my soul as if with double-pronged goad."

359 ἰὼ ἰὼ μοῖρα μοῖρα , πέφρικ’ εἰσιδοῦσα πρᾶξιν Ἰοῦς .
Chorus: "Alas, O Fate, O Fate, I shudder to behold the plight that has befallen Io."

360 πρῴ γε στενάζεις καὶ φόβου πλέα τις εἶ ·
Chorus: "You lament and are full of fear all too soon."

361 ἐπίσχες ἔστ’ ἂν καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ προσμάθῃς .
Chorus: "Wait until you have learned the rest as well."

362 λέγ’ , ἐκδίδασκε ·
Chorus: "Proceed, tell all."

357 ἔα ἔα , ἄπεχε , φεῦ ·
Io: "Oh, ah, go away, alas!"

358 οὔποτ’ οὔποτ’ ηὔχουν ὧδε ξένους μολεῖσθαι λόγους εἰς ἀκοὰν ἐμάν , οὐδ’ ὧδε δυσθέατα καὶ δύσοιστα πήματα , λύματα , δείματα ἀμφάκει κέντρῳ τύψειν ψυχὰν ἐμάν .
Io: "Never, oh never, did I dream that words so strange would greet my ears, nor that sufferings so grievous to look upon, yes, and so grievous to endure, a tale of outrage, would strike my soul as if with double-pronged goad."

359 ἰὼ ἰὼ μοῖρα μοῖρα , πέφρικ’ εἰσιδοῦσα πρᾶξιν Ἰοῦς .
Chorus: "Alas, O Fate, O Fate, I shudder to behold the plight that has befallen Io."

360 πρῴ γε στενάζεις καὶ φόβου πλέα τις εἶ ·
Chorus: "You lament and are full of fear all too soon."

361 ἐπίσχες ἔστ’ ἂν καὶ τὰ λοιπὰ προσμάθῃς .
Chorus: "Wait until you have learned the rest as well."

362 λέγ’ , ἐκδίδασκε ·
Chorus: "Proceed, tell all."

363 τοῖς νοσοῦσί τοι γλυκὺ τὸ λοιπὸν ἄλγος προυξεπίστασθαι τορῶς .
Chorus: "It is comforting for the sick to know clearly beforehand what pain still awaits them."

364 τὴν πρίν γε χρείαν ἠνύσασθ’ ἐμοῦ πάρα κούφως ·
Prometheus: "You gained your former request easily

365	μαθεῖν γὰρ τῆσδε πρῶτ’ ἐχρῄζετε τὸν ἀμφ’ ἑαυτῆς ἆθλον ἐξηγουμένης ·
For you first desired the story of her ordeal from her own lips.

366	τὰ λοιπὰ νῦν ἀκούσαθ’ , οἷα χρὴ πάθη τλῆναι πρὸς Ἥρας τήνδε τὴν νεάνιδα .
Hear now the sequel, the sufferings this maid is fated to endure at Hera’s hand.

367	σύ τ’ Ἰνάχειον σπέρμα , τοὺς ἐμοὺς λόγους θυμῷ βάλ’ , ὡς ἂν τέρματ’ ἐκμάθῃς ὁδοῦ .
And may you, daughter of Inachus, lay to heart my words so that you may learn the end of your wanderings.

368	πρῶτον μὲν ἐνθένδ’ ἡλίου πρὸς ἀντολὰς στρέψασα σαυτὴν στεῖχ’ ἀνηρότους γύας ·
First, from this spot, turn yourself toward the rising sun and make your way over untilled plains;

369	Σκύθας δ’ ἀφίξῃ νομάδας , οἳ πλεκτὰς στέγας πεδάρσιοι ναίουσ’ ἐπ’ εὐκύκλοις ὄχοις ἑκηβόλοις τόξοισιν ἐξηρτυμένοι ·
and you shall reach the Scythian nomads, who dwell in thatched houses, perched aloft on strong-wheeled wagons and are equipped with far-darting bows.

370	οἷς μὴ πελάζειν , ἀλλ’ ἁλιστόνοις πόδας χρίμπτουσα ῥαχίαισιν ἐκπερᾶν χθόνα .
Do not approach them, but keeping your feet near the rugged shore, where the sea breaks with a roar, pass on beyond their land.

371	λαιᾶς δὲ χειρὸς οἱ σιδηροτέκτονες οἰκοῦσι Χάλυβες , οὓς φυλάξασθαί σε χρή .
On the left hand dwell the workers in iron, the Chalybes, and

you must beware of them, since they are savage and are not to be approached by strangers.

372	ἀνήμεροι γὰρ οὐδὲ πρόσπλατοι ξένοις .
Then you shall reach the river Hybristes,[*] which does not belie its name.

373	ἥξεις δ’ Ὑβριστὴν ποταμὸν οὐ ψευδώνυμον , ὃν μὴ περάσῃς , οὐ γὰρ εὔβατος περᾶν , πρὶν ἂν πρὸς αὐτὸν Καύκασον μόλῃς , ὀρῶν ὕψιστον , ἔνθα ποταμὸς ἐκφυσᾷ μένος κροτάφων ἀπ’ αὐτῶν .
Do not cross this, for it is hard to cross, until you come to Caucasus itself, loftiest of mountains, where from its very brows the river pours out its might in fury.

374	ἀστρογείτονας δὲ χρὴ κορυφὰς ὑπερβάλλουσαν ἐς μεσημβρινὴν βῆναι κέλευθον , ἔνθ’ , Ἀμαζόνων στρατὸν ἥξεις στυγάνορ’ , αἳ Θεμίσκυράν ποτε κατοικιοῦσιν ἀμφὶ Θερμώδονθ’ , ἵνα τραχεῖα πόντου Σαλμυδησσία γνάθος ἐχθρόξενος ναύταισι , μητρυιὰ νεῶν ·
You must pass over its crests, which neighbor the stars, and enter upon a southward course, where you shall reach the host of the Amazons, who loathe all men. They shall in time to come inhabit Themiscyra on the Thermodon, where, fronting the sea, is Salmydessus’ rugged jaw, evil host of mariners, step-mother of ships.

375	αὗταί σ’ ὁδηγήσουσι καὶ μάλ’ ἀσμένως .
The Amazons will gladly guide you on your way.

376	ἰσθμὸν δ’ ἐπ’ αὐταῖς στενοπόροις λίμν

ης πύλαις Κιμμερικὸν ἥξεις , ὃν θρασυσπλάγχνως σε χρὴ λιποῦσαν αὐλῶν’ ἐκπερᾶν Μαιωτικόν ·
Next, just at the narrow portals of the harbor, you shall reach the Cimmerian isthmus. This you must leave with stout heart and pass through the channel of Maeotis;

377	ἔσται δὲ θνητοῖς εἰσαεὶ λόγος μέγας τῆς σῆς πορείας , Βόσπορος δ’ ἐπώνυμος κεκλήσεται .
and ever after among mankind there shall be great mention of your passing, and it shall be called after you the Bosporus.[*]

378	λιποῦσα δ’ Εὐρώπης πέδον ἤπειρον ἥξεις Ἀσιάδ’ ·
Then, leaving the soil of Europe, you shall come to the Asian continent.

380	ἆρ’ , ὑμῖν δοκεῖ ὁ τῶν θεῶν τύραννος ἐς τὰ πάνθ’ ὁμῶς βίαιος εἶναι ;
Does it not seem to you that the tyrant of the gods is violent in all his ways?

381	τῇδε γὰρ θνητῇ θεὸς χρῄζων μιγῆναι τάσδ’ ἐπέρριψεν πλάνας .
For this god, desirous of union with this mortal maid, has imposed upon her these wanderings.

382	πικροῦ δ’ ἔκυρσας , ὦ κόρη , τῶν σῶν γάμων μνηστῆρος .
Maiden, you have gained a cruel suitor for your hand.

383	οὓς γὰρ νῦν ἀκήκοας λόγους , εἶναι δόκει σοι μηδέπω ’ν προοιμίοις .
As to the tale you now have heard— understand that it has not even passed the introduction.

384	ἰώ μοί μοι , ἒ ἔ .
Ah me, ah me, alas!

385	σὺ δ’ αὖ κέκραγας κ- ἀναμυχθίζῃ ;
Prometheus: What! You are crying and groaning again?

386	τί που δράσεις , ὅταν τὰ λοιπὰ πυνθάνῃ κακά ;
What will you do, I wonder, when you have learned the sufferings still in store for you?

387	ἦ γάρ τι λοιπὸν τῇδε πημάτων ἐρεῖς ;
Chorus: What! Can it be that you have sufferings still left to recount to her?

388	δυσχείμερόν γε πέλαγος ἀτηρᾶς δύης .
Prometheus: Yes, a tempestuous sea of calamitous distress.

389	τί δῆτ’ ἐμοὶ ζῆν κέρδος , ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐν τάχει ἔρριψ’ ἐμαυτὴν τῆσδ’ ἀπὸ στύφλου πέτρας , ὅπως πέδοι σκήψασα τῶν πάντων πόνων ἀπηλλάγην ;
Io: What gain have I then in life? Why did I not hurl myself straightaway from this rugged rock, so that I was dashed to earth and freed from all my sufferings?

390	κρεῖσσον γὰρ εἰσάπαξ θανεῖν ἢ τὰς ἁπάσας ἡμέρας πάσχειν κακῶς .
It is better to die once and for all than linger out all my days in misery.

391	ἦ δυσπετῶς ἂν τοὺς ἐμοὺς ἄθλους φέροις , ὅτῳ θανεῖν μέν ἐστιν οὐ πεπρωμένον ·
Prometheus: Ah, you would hardly bear my agonies to whom it is not foredoomed to die;

392	αὕτη γὰρ ἦν ἂν πημάτων ἀπαλλαγή ·
for death would have freed me from my sufferings.

393	νῦν δ’ οὐδέν ἐστι τέρμα μοι προκείμενον μόχθων , πρὶν ἂν Ζεὺς ἐκπέσῃ τυραννίδος .
But now no limit to my tribulations has been appointed until Zeus is hurled from his sovereignty.

394	ἦ γάρ ποτ’ ἔστιν ἐκπεσεῖν ἀρχῆς Δία ;
Io: What! Shall Zeus one day be hurled from his dominion?

395	ἥδοι’ ἄν , οἶμαι , τήνδ’

 ἰδοῦσα συμφοράν .
Prometheus: You would rejoice, I think, to see that happen.

396	πῶς δ’ οὐκ ἄν , ἥτις ἐκ Διὸς πάσχω κακῶς ;
Io: Why not, since it is at the hand of Zeus that I suffer?

397	ὡς τοίνυν ὄντων τῶνδέ σοι μαθεῖν πάρα .
Prometheus: Then you may assure yourself that these things are true.

398	πρὸς τοῦ τύραννα σκῆπτρα συληθήσεται ;
Io: By whom shall he be despoiled of the sceptre of his sovereignty?

399	πρὸς αὐτὸς αὑτοῦ κενοφρόνων βουλευμάτων .
Prometheus: By himself and his own empty-headed purposes.

400	ποίῳ τρόπῳ ;
Io: In what way? Oh tell me, if there be no harm in telling.

401	σήμηνον , εἰ μή τις βλάβη .
Prometheus: He shall make a marriage that shall one day cause him distress.

402	γαμεῖ γάμον τοιοῦτον ᾧ ποτ’ ἀσχαλᾷ .
With a divinity or with a mortal? If it may be told, speak out.

403	θέορτον , ἢ βρότειον ;
Io: Why ask with whom? I may not speak of this.

404	εἰ ῥητόν , φράσον .
Prometheus: Is it by his consort that he shall be dethroned?

405	τί δ’ ὅντιν’ ·
Io: Yes, since she shall bear a son mightier than his father.

406	;
Prometheus: And has he no means to avert this doom?

407	οὐ γὰρ ῥητὸν αὐδᾶσθαι τόδε .
Io: No, none—except me, if I were released from bondage.

408	ἦ πρὸς δάμαρτος ἐξανίσταται θρόνων ;
Prometheus: Who then is to release you against the will of Zeus?

409	ἣ τέξεταί γε παῖδα φέρτερον πατρός .
Io: It is to be one of your own grandchildren.

410	οὐδ’ ἔστιν αὐτῷ τῆσδ’ ἀποστροφὴ τύχης ;
Prometheus: What did you say? A child of mine will release you from your misery?

411	οὐ δῆτα , πλὴν ἔγωγ’ ἂν ἐκ δεσμῶν λυθείς .
Io: No, none—except me, if I were released from bondage.

412	τίς οὖν ὁ λύσων ἐστὶν ἄκοντος Διός ;
Prometheus: Who then is to release you against the will of Zeus?

413	τῶν σῶν τιν’ αὐτὸν ἐγγόνων εἶναι χρεών .
Io: It is to be one of your own grandchildren.

414	πῶς εἶπας ;
Prometheus: What did you say?

415	ἦ ’μὸς παῖς σ’ ἀπαλλάξει κακῶν ;
Io: A child of mine will release you from your misery?

416 τρίτος γε γένναν πρὸς δέκ’ ἄλλαισιν γοναῖς .
The third in descent after ten generations.

417 ἥδ’ οὐκέτ’ εὐξύμβλητος ἡ χρησμῳδία .
Io: Your prophecy is not easy to understand.

418 καὶ μηδὲ σαυτῆς ἐκμαθεῖν ζήτει πόνους .
Prometheus: Yes, so do not seek to learn the full extent of your own sufferings.

419 μή μοι προτείνων κέρδος εἶτ’ ἀποστέρει .
Io: Do not offer me a favor and then withdraw it.

420 δυοῖν λόγοιν σε θατέρῳ δωρήσομαι .
Prometheus: I will present you with one or other of two tales.

421 ποίοιν ;
Io: Which two? 

422 πρόδειξον , αἵρεσίν τ’ ἐμοὶ δίδου .
Set them forth and offer me the choice.

423 δίδωμ’ ·
Prometheus: I am making the offer: 

424 ἑλοῦ γάρ , ἢ πόνων τὰ λοιπά σοι φράσω σαφηνῶς , ἢ τὸν ἐκλύσοντ’ ἐμέ .
choose whether I shall reveal the sufferings still in store for you or the one who will be my deliverer.


425 τούτων σὺ τὴν μὲν τῇδε , τὴν δ’ ἐμοὶ χάριν θέσθαι θέλησον , μηδ’ ἀτιμάσῃς λόγου ·
Chorus: Consent to bestow on her one of these favors, and on me the other; do not deny me the tale.

426 καὶ τῇδε μὲν γέγωνε τὴν λοιπὴν πλάνην , ἐμοὶ δὲ τὸν λύσοντα ·
Tell her about her further wanderings; tell me who will deliver you—



427 τοῦτο γὰρ ποθῶ .
for I would like to know this.

428	ἐπεὶ προθυμεῖσθ’ , οὐκ ἐναντιώσομαι τὸ μὴ οὐ γεγωνεῖν πᾶν ὅσον προσχρῄζετε .
Prometheus: Well, since you are eager, I will not refuse to proclaim all that you still crave to know.

429	σοὶ πρῶτον , Ἰοῖ , πολύδονον πλάνην φράσω , ἣν ἐγγράφου σὺ μνήμοσιν δέλτοις φρενῶν .
First, to you, Io, will I declare your much-vexed wandering, and may you engrave it on the recording tablets of your mind.

430	ὅταν περάσῃς ῥεῖθρον ἠπείροιν ὅρον , πρὸς ἀντολὰς φλογῶπας ἡλιοστιβεῖς πόντου περῶσα φλοῖσβον , ἔστ’ ἂν ἐξίκῃ πρὸς Γοργόνεια πεδία Κισθήνης , ἵνα αἱ Φορκίδες ναίουσι δηναιαὶ κόραι τρεῖς κυκνόμορφοι , κοινὸν ὄμμ’ ἐκτημέναι , μονόδοντες , ἃς οὔθ’ ἥλιος προσδέρκεται ἀκτῖσιν οὔθ’ ἡ νύκτερος μήνη ποτέ .
When you have crossed the stream that bounds the two continents, toward the flaming east, where the sun walks, crossing the surging sea until you reach the Gorgonean plains of Cisthene, where the daughters of Phorcys dwell, ancient maids, three in number, shaped like swans, possessing one eye amongst them and a single tooth; neither does the sun with his beams look down upon them, nor ever the nightly moon.

431	πέλας δ’ ἀδελφαὶ τῶνδε τρεῖς κατάπτεροι , δρακοντόμαλλοι Γοργόνες βροτοστυγεῖς , ἃς θνητὸς οὐδεὶς εἰσιδὼν ἕξει πνοάς .
And

near them are their three winged sisters, the snake-haired Gorgons, loathed of mankind, whom no one of mortal kind shall look upon and still draw breath.

432	τοιοῦτο μέν σοι τοῦτο φρούριον λέγω ·
Such is the peril that I bid you to guard against.

433	ἄλλην δ’ ἄκουσον δυσχερῆ θεωρίαν ·
But now listen to another and a fearsome spectacle.

434	ὀξυστόμους γὰρ Ζηνὸς ἀκραγεῖς κύνας γρῦπας φύλαξαι , τόν τε μουνῶπα στρατὸν Ἀριμασπὸν ἱπποβάμον’ , οἳ χρυσόρρυτον οἰκοῦσιν ἀμφὶ νᾶμα Πλούτωνος πόρου ·
Beware of the sharp-beaked hounds of Zeus that do not bark, the gryphons, and the one-eyed Arimaspian folk, mounted on horses, who dwell about the flood of Pluto's stream that flows with gold.

435	τούτοις σὺ μὴ πέλαζε .
Do not approach them.

436	τηλουρὸν δὲ γῆν ἥξεις , κελαινὸν φῦλον , οἳ πρὸς ἡλίου ναίουσι πηγαῖς , ἔνθα ποταμὸς Αἰθίοψ .
Then you shall come to a far-off country of a dark race that dwells by the waters of the sun, where the river Aethiop is.

437	τούτου παρ’ ὄχθας ἕρφ’ , ἕως ἂν ἐξίκῃ καταβασμόν , ἔνθα Βιβλίνων ὀρῶν ἄπο ἵησι σεπτὸν Νεῖλος εὔποτον ῥέος .
Follow along its banks until you reach the cataract, where, from the Bybline mountains, Nile sends forth his hallowed and sweet stream.

438	οὗτός σ’ ὁδώσει τὴν τρίγωνον ἐς χθόνα Νειλῶτιν , οὗ δὴ τὴν μακρὰν ἀποικίαν , Ἰοῖ

, πέπρωται σοί τε καὶ τέκνοις κτίσαι .
He will conduct you on your way to the three-angled land of Nilotis, where, at last, it is ordained for you, O Io, and for your children to found your far-off colony.

439	τῶν δ’ εἴ τί σοι ψελλόν τε καὶ δυσεύρετον , ἐπανδίπλαζε καὶ σαφῶς ἐκμάνθανε ·
If anything of this is confusing to you and hard to understand, may you question me yet again, and gain a clear account; for I have more leisure than I crave.

440	σχολὴ δὲ πλείων ἢ θέλω πάρεστί μοι .
Prometheus: I have more time at my disposal than I wish.

441	εἰ μέν τι τῇδε λοιπὸν ἢ παρειμένον ἔχεις γεγωνεῖν τῆς πολυφθόρου πλάνης , λέγ’ ·
Chorus: If there is anything still remaining or passed over of her direful wandering that you have to tell, oh speak.

442	εἰ δὲ πάντ’ εἴρηκας , ἡμῖν αὖ χάριν δὸς ἥνπερ αἰτούμεσθα , μέμνησαι δέ που .
But if you have told all, grant us in turn the favor we request—you probably have it still in memory.

443	τὸ πᾶν πορείας ἥδε τέρμ’ ἀκήκοεν .
She has now heard the full end of her travels;

444	ὅπως δ’ ἂν εἰδῇ μὴ μάτην κλύουσά μου , ἃ πρὶν μολεῖν δεῦρ’ ἐκμεμόχθηκεν φράσω , τεκμήριον τοῦτ’ αὐτὸ δοὺς μύθων ἐμῶν .
yet so she may know that she has heard no vain tale from me, I will describe the toils she has endured before she came here, giving this as a sure proof of my account.

445	ὄχλον μὲν οὖν τὸν πλεῖστον ἐκλείψω λόγων , πρὸς αὐτὸ δ’ εἶμι τέρμα σῶν πλανημάτων .
Most of the weary tale I shall leave out and come to the very close of your wanderings.

446	ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἦλθες πρὸς Μολοσσὰ γάπεδα , τὴν αἰπύνωτόν τ’ ἀμφὶ Δωδώνην , ἵνα μαντεῖα θᾶκός τ’ ἐστὶ Θεσπρωτοῦ Διός , τέρας τ’ ἄπιστον , αἱ προσήγοροι δρύες , ὑφ’ ὧν σὺ λαμπρῶς κ- οὐδὲν αἰνικτηρίως προσηγορεύθης ἡ Διὸς κλεινὴ δάμαρ μέλλουσ’ ἔσεσθαι .
For when you reached the Molossian plains and the sheer ridge that encircles Dodona, where lies the prophetic seat of Thesprotian Zeus and that marvel, passing all belief, the talking oaks, by which you clearly, and in no riddling terms, were saluted as the renowned bride-to-be of Zeus 

447	τῶνδε προσσαίνει σέ τι ;
(is any of this pleasing to you?)

448	ἐντεῦθεν οἰστρήσασα τὴν παρακτίαν κέλευθον ᾖξας πρ

ὸς μέγαν κόλπον Ῥέας , ἀφ’ οὗ παλιμπλάγκτοισι χειμάζῃ δρόμοις ·
then, stung by the gadfly, you rushed along the pathway by the shore to the great gulf of Rhea, from where you are tossed in backward-wandering course;

449	χρόνον δὲ τὸν μέλλοντα πόντιος μυχός , σαφῶς ἐπίστασ’ , Ἰόνιος κεκλήσεται , .
and for all time to come a recess of the sea, be well assured, shall bear the name Ionian, as a memorial of your crossing for all mankind.

450	τῆς σῆς πορείας μνῆμα τοῖς πᾶσιν βροτοῖς .
These, then, are the tokens to you of my understanding, to show that it discerns more than has been made manifest.

451	σημεῖά σοι τάδ’ ἐστὶ τῆς ἐμῆς φρενός , ὡς δέρκεται πλέον τι τοῦ πεφασμένου .
The rest I shall declare both to you and her, returning to the track of my former tale.

452	τὰ λοιπὰ δ’ ὑμῖν τῇδέ τ’ ἐς κοινὸν φράσω , ἐς τ- αὐτὸν ἐλθὼν τῶν πάλαι λόγων ἴχνος .
There is a city, Canobus, on the extremity of the land at the very mouth and silt-bar of the Nile.

453	ἔστιν πόλις Κάνωβος ἐσχάτη χθονός , Νείλου πρὸς αὐτῷ στόματι καὶ προσχώματι ·
There at last Zeus restores you to your senses by the mere stroke and touch of his unterrifying hand.

454	ἐνταῦθα δή σε Ζεὺς τίθησιν ἔμφρονα ἐπαφῶν ἀταρβεῖ χειρὶ καὶ θιγὼν μόνον .
And you shall bring forth dark Epaphus, thus named from the manner of Zeus’ engendering;

455	ἐπώνυμον δὲ τῶν Διὸς γεννημάτων τέξεις κελαινὸν Ἔπαφον , ὃς καρπώσεται ὅσην πλατύρρου

ς Νεῖλος ἀρδεύει χθόνα ·
who shall harvest all the land watered by the broad-flowing Nile.

456	πέμπτη δ’ ἀπ’ αὐτοῦ γέννα πεντηκοντάπαις πάλιν πρὸς Ἄργος οὐχ ἑκοῦσ’ ἐλεύσεται θηλύσπορος , φεύγουσα συγγενῆ γάμον ἀνεψιῶν ·
Fifth in descent from him, fifty maidens shall return to Argos, not of their own free choice, but fleeing marriage with their cousin kin;

457	οἱ δ’ ἐπτοημένοι φρένας , κίρκοι πελειῶν οὐ μακρὰν λελειμμένοι , ἥξουσι θηρεύοντες οὐ θηρασίμους γάμους , φθόνον δὲ σωμάτων ἕξει θεός ·
while these, their hearts ablaze with passion, like falcons eagerly pursuing doves, shall come in pursuit of wedlock unlawful to pursue; but God shall grudge them enjoyment of their brides.

458	Πελασγία δὲ δέξεται θηλυκτόνῳ Ἄρει , δαμέντων νυκτιφρουρήτῳ θράσει .
Pelasgian soil shall offer the maids a home, when, in the watches of the night, their husbands have been slain by a deed of daring wrought by the women’s murderous blows.

459	γυνὴ γὰρ ἄνδρ’ ἕκαστον αἰῶνος στερεῖ , δίθηκτον ἐν σφαγαῖσι βάψασα ξίφος ·
For each bride shall take the life of her lord, dyeing a two-edged sword in his blood

460	τοιάδ’ ἐπ’ ἐχθροὺς τοὺς ἐμοὺς ἔλθοι Κύπρις .
—in such ways may Love come upon my enemies!

461	μίαν δὲ παίδων ἵμερος θέλξει τὸ μὴ κτεῖναι σύνευνον , ἀλλ’ ἀπαμβλυνθήσεται γνώμην ·
However, love’s desire shall charm one of the maidens not to slay her mate; rather, her resolve will lose its edge;


462	δυοῖν δὲ θάτερον βουλήσεται , κλύειν ἄναλκις μᾶλλον ἢ μιαιφόνος ·
for she will make her choice between two evil names to be called coward rather than murderess.


463	αὕτη κατ’ Ἄργος βασιλικὸν τέξει γένος .
She it is who shall give birth in Argos to a royal line—

464	μακροῦ λόγου δεῖ ταῦτ’ ἐπεξελθεῖν τορῶς .
a long story is necessary to explain this clearly; 

465	σπορᾶς γε μὴν ἐκ τῆσδε φύσεται θρασὺς τόξοισι κλεινός , ὃς πόνων ἐκ τῶνδ’ ἐμὲ λύσει .
of her seed, however, shall be born a man of daring, renowned with the bow, who shall deliver me from these toils.

466	τοιόνδε χρησμὸν ἡ παλαιγενὴς μήτηρ ἐμοὶ διῆλθε Τιτανὶς Θέμις ·
Such is the oracle recounted to me by my mother, Titan Themis, born long ago.

467	ὅπως δὲ κ- ὅπη , ταῦτα δεῖ μακροῦ λόγου εἰπεῖν , σύ τ’ οὐδὲν ἐκμαθοῦσα κερδανεῖς .The manner and the means—these need lengthy speech to tell, and to learn them all would not be of any benefit.

468	ἐλελεῦ ἐλελεῦ, ὑπό μ’ αὖ σφάκελος καὶ φρενοπληγεῖς μανίαι θάλπουσ’, οἴστρου δ’ ἄρδις χρίει μ’ ἄπυρος ·
Oh! Oh! Alas! Once again convulsive pain and frenzy, striking my brain, inflame me. I am stung by the gadfly’s barb, unforged by fire.

469	κραδία δὲ φόβῳ φρένα λακτίζει.
My heart knocks at my ribs in terror;

470	τροχοδινεῖται δ’ ὄμμαθ’ ἑλίγδην, ἔξω δὲ δρόμου φέρομαι λύσσης πνεύματι μάργῳ, γλώσσης ἀκρατής ·
my eyeballs roll wildly round and round. I am carried out of my course by a fierce blast of madness; I’ve lost all mastery over my tongue,

471	θολεροὶ δὲ λόγοι παίουσ’ εἰκῆ στυγνῆς πρὸς κύμασιν ἄτης.
and a stream of turbid words beats recklessly against the billows of dark destruction.

472	ἦ σοφὸς ἦ σοφὸς ἦν ὃς πρῶτος ἐν γνώμᾳ τόδ’ ἐβάστασε καὶ γλώσσᾳ διεμυθολόγησεν, ὡς τὸ κηδεῦσαι καθ’ ἑαυτὸν ἀριστεύει μακρῷ, καὶ μήτε τῶν πλούτῳ διαθρυπτομένων μήτε τῶν γέννᾳ μεγαλυνομένων ὄντα χερνήταν ἐραστεῦσαι γάμων.
Ah, sage, sage indeed, was he who first pondered this truth in his mind and with his tongue gave it utterance— that to marry in one’s own class is far the best—a poor man should not desire to marry among those who are pampered by riches, or who are mighty in pride of birth.

473	μήποτε μήποτέ μ’ , ὦ πότνιαι Μοῖραι, λεχέων Διὸς εὐνάτειραν ἴδοισθε πέλουσαν ·
Never, oh never, immortal Fates, may

you see me the partner of the bed of Zeus,

474	μηδὲ πλαθείην γαμέτᾳ τινὶ τῶν ἐξ οὐρανοῦ.
and may I be wedded to no bridegroom who descends to me from heaven.

475	ταρβῶ γὰρ ἀστεργάνορα παρθενίαν εἰσορῶσ’ Ἰοῦς ἀμαλαπτομέναν δυσπλάνοις Ἥρας ἀλατείαις πόνων.
For I shudder when I behold the loveless maidenhood of Io, cruelly crushed like this by her toilsome wanderings sent by Hera.

476	ἐμοὶ δ’ ὅτε μὲν ὁμαλὸς ὁ γάμος, ἄφοβος ·
When marriage is on equal terms, in my opinion it is no cause for dread;

477	οὐ δέδια ·
I have no fear.

478	μηδὲ κρεισσόνων θεῶν ἔρως ἄφυκτον ὄμμα προσδράκοι με.
so never may the love of the mightier gods cast on me its irresistible glance.

479	ἀπόλεμος ὅδε γ’ ὁ πόλεμος, ἄπορα πόριμος ·
That would indeed be a war that cannot be fought, a source of resourceless misery;

480	οὐδ’ ἔχω τίς ἂν γενοίμαν.
and I do not know what would be my fate,

481	τὰν Διὸς γὰρ οὐχ ὁρῶ μῆτιν ὅπα φύγοιμ’ ἄν.
for I do not see how I could escape the designs of Zeus.


482 ἦ μὴν ἔτι Ζεύς, καίπερ αὐθάδης φρενῶν, ἔσται ταπεινός, οἷον ἐξαρτύεται γάμον γαμεῖν, ὃς αὐτὸν ἐκ τυραννίδος θρόνων τ’ ἄιστον ἐκβαλεῖ ·
Yes, truly, the day will come when Zeus, although stubborn of soul, shall be humbled, seeing that he plans a marriage that shall hurl him into oblivion from his sovereignty and throne;

483 πατρὸς δ’ ἀρὰ Κρόνου τότ’ ἤδη παντελῶς κρανθήσεται, ἣν ἐκπίτνων ἠρᾶτο δηναιῶν θρόνων.
and then immediately the curse his father Cronus invoked as he fell from his ancient throne, shall be fulfilled to the uttermost.

484 τοιῶνδε μόχθων ἐκτροπὴν οὐδεὶς θεῶν δύναιτ’ ἂν αὐτῷ πλὴν ἐμοῦ δεῖξαι σαφῶς.
Deliverance from such ruin no one of the gods can show him clearly except me.

485 ἐγὼ τάδ’ οἶδα κ- ᾧ τρόπῳ.
I know the fact and the means.

486 πρὸς ταῦτά νυν θαρσῶν καθήσθω τοῖς πεδαρσίοις κτύποις πιστός, τινάσσων τ’ ἐν χεροῖν πύρπνουν βέλος.
So let him sit there in his assurance, putting his trust in the crash reverberating on high and brandishing his fire-breathing bolt in his hands.

487 οὐδὲν γὰρ αὐτῷ ταῦτ’ ἐπαρκέσει τὸ μὴ οὐ πεσεῖν ἀτίμως πτώματ’ οὐκ ἀνασχετά ·
For these shall not protect him from falling in ignominious and unendurable ruin.

488 τοῖον παλαιστὴν νῦν παρασκευάζεται ἐπ’ αὐτὸς αὑτῷ, δυσμαχώτατον τέρας ·
Such an adversary is he now preparing despite himself, a prodigy irresistible,

489 ὃς δὴ κεραυνοῦ κρείσσον' εὑρήσει φλόγα, βροντῆς θ' ὑπερβάλλοντα καρτερὸν κτύπον ·
even one who shall discover a flame mightier than the lightning and a deafening crash to outroar the thunder;

490 θαλασσίαν τε γῆς τινάκτειραν νόσον τρίαιναν, αἰχμὴν τὴν Ποσειδῶνος, σκεδᾷ.
a prodigy who shall shiver the trident, Poseidon’s spear, that scourge of the sea and shaker of the land.

491 πταίσας δὲ τῷδε πρὸς κακῷ μαθήσεται ὅσον τό τ' ἄρχειν καὶ τὸ δουλεύειν δίχα.
Then, wrecked upon this evil, Zeus shall learn how different it is to be a sovereign and a slave.

Chorus
492 σύ θην ἃ χρῄζεις, ταῦτ' ἐπιγλωσσᾷ Διός.
Surely, it is only your own desire that you utter as a curse against Zeus.

Prometheus
493 ἅπερ τελεῖται, πρὸς δ' ἃ βούλομαι λέγω.
I speak what shall be brought to pass and, moreover, my own desire.

Chorus
494 καὶ προσδοκᾶν χρὴ δεσπόσειν Ζηνός τινα;
Must we really look for one to gain mastery over Zeus?

Prometheus
495 καὶ τῶνδέ γ', ἕξει δυσλοφωτέρους πόνους.
Yes, and he shall bear upon his neck pangs more galling than these of mine.

496	πῶς δ’ οὐχὶ ταρβεῖς τοιάδ’ ἐκρίπτων ἔπη;
How is it that you are not afraid to utter such taunts?

497	τί δ’ ἂν φοβοίμην ᾧ θανεῖν οὐ μόρσιμον;
Why should I fear since I am fated not to die?

498	ἀλλ’ ἆθλον ἄν σοι τοῦδ’ ἔτ’ ἀλγίω πόροι.
But he might inflict on you an ordeal even more bitter than this.

499	ὁ δ’ οὖν ποιείτω;
Let him do his will, for all I care!

500	πάντα προσδοκητά μοι.
I am prepared for anything.

501	οἱ προσκυνοῦντες τὴν Ἀδράστειαν σοφοί.
Wise are they who do homage to Necessity.

502	σέβου, προσεύχου, θῶπτε τὸν κρατοῦντ’ ἀεί.
Worship, adore, and fawn upon whoever is your lord.

503	ἐμοὶ δ’ ἔλασσον Ζηνὸς ἢ μηδὲν μέλει.
But for Zeus I care less than nothing.

504	δράτω, κρατείτω τόνδε τὸν βραχὺν χρόνον, ὅπως θέλει;
Let him do his will, let him hold his power for his little day—

505	δαρὸν γὰρ οὐκ ἄρξει θεοῖς.
since he will not bear sway over the gods for long.

506	ἀλλ’ εἰσορῶ γὰρ τόνδε τὸν Διὸς τρόχιν, τὸν τοῦ τυράννου τοῦ νέου διάκονον;
But wait, for over there I see his messenger, the servant of our new lord and master.

507	πάντως τι καινὸν ἀγγελῶν ἐλήλυθεν.
Certainly he has come to announce some news.



508	σὲ τὸν σοφιστήν, τὸν πικρῶς ὑπέρπικρον, τὸν ἐξαμαρτόντ' εἰς θεοὺς ἐφημέροις πορόντα τιμάς, τὸν πυρὸς κλέπτην λέγω;
To you, the clever and crafty, bitter beyond all bitterness, who has sinned against the gods in bestowing honors upon creatures of a day—to you, thief of fire, I speak.

509	πατὴρ ἄνωγέ σ' οὕστινας κομπεῖς γάμους αὐδᾶν, πρὸς ὧν ἐκεῖνος ἐκπίπτει κράτους.
The Father commands that you tell what marriage you boast of, whereby he is to be hurled from power—

510	καὶ ταῦτα μέντοι μηδὲν αἰνικτηρίως, ἀλλ' αὔθ' ἕκαστα φράζε;
and this, mark well, set forth in no riddling fashion, but point by point, as the case exactly stands;

511	μηδέ μοι διπλᾶς ὁδούς, Προμηθεῦ, προσβάλῃς.
and do not impose upon me a double journey, Prometheus

512	ὁρᾷς δ' ὅτι Ζεὺς τοῖς τοιούτοις οὐχὶ μαλθακίζεται.
—you see Zeus is not appeased by dealings such as yours.


513	σεμνόστομός γε καὶ φρονήματος πλέως ὁ μῦθός ἐστιν, ὡς θεῶν ὑπηρέτου.
Bravely spoken, in truth, and swollen with pride is your speech, as befits a minion of the gods.


514	νέον νέοι κρατεῖτε καὶ δοκεῖτε δὴ ναίειν ἀπενθῆ πέργαμ';
Young you are, as young your power, and you think indeed that you inhabit heights beyond the reach of grief.


515	οὐκ ἐκ τῶνδ' ἐγὼ δισσοὺς τυράννους ἐκπεσόντας ᾐσθόμην;
Have I not seen two sovereigns cast out from these heights?

516	τρίτον δὲ τὸν νῦν κοιρανοῦντ' ἐπόψομαι αἴσχιστα καὶ τάχιστα.
A third, the present lord, I shall live to see cast out in ruin most shameful and most swift.


517	μή τί σοι δοκῶ ταρβεῖν ὑποπτήσσειν τε τε τοὺς νέους θεούς;
Do you think I quail, perhaps, and cower before these upstart gods?

518	πολλοῦ γε καὶ τοῦ παντὸς ἐλλείπω.
Far from it—no, not at all.


519	σὺ δὲ κέλευθον ἥνπερ ἦλθες ἐγκόνει πάλιν ·
But scurry back the way you came;

520	πεύσῃ γὰρ οὐδὲν ὧν ἀνιστορεῖς ἐμέ.
for you shall learn nothing about which you question me.


521	τοιοῖσδε μέντοι καὶ πρὶν αὐθαδίσμασιν ἐς τάσδε σαυτὸν πημονὰς καθώρμισας.
Yet it was by such proud wilfulness before, too, that you brought yourself to this harbor of distress.

522	τῆς σῆς λατρείας τὴν ἐμὴν δυσπραξίαν, σαφῶς ἐπίστασ', οὐκ ἂν ἀλλάξαιμ' ἐγώ.
For your servitude, rest assured, I’d not barter my hard lot, not I.

523	κρεῖσσον γὰρ οἶμαι τῇδε λατρεύειν πέτρᾳ ἢ πατρὶ φῦναι Ζηνὶ πιστὸν ἄγγελον.
Better, no doubt, to serve this rock than be the trusted messenger of Father Zeus!

524	οὕτως ὑβρίζειν τοὺς ὑβρίζοντας χρεών.
Such is the proper style for the insolent to offer insult.

525	χλιδᾶν ἔοικας τοῖς παροῦσι πράγμασι.
I think you revel in your present plight.

526	χλιδῶ;
I revel?

527	χλιδῶντας ὧδε τοὺς ἐμοὺς ἐγὼ ἐχθροὺς ἴδοιμι;
Oh, I wish that I might see my enemies revelling in this way!

528	καὶ σὲ δ’ ἐν τούτοις λέγω.
And you, too, I count among them.

529	ἦ κ- ἐμὲ γάρ τι συμφοραῖς ἐπαιτιᾷ;
What! You blame me in some way for your calamities?

530	ἁπλῷ λόγῳ τοὺς πάντας ἐχθαίρω θεούς, ὅσοι παθόντες εὖ κακοῦσί μ' ἐκδίκως.
In one word, I hate all the gods that received good at my hands and with ill requite me wrongfully.

531	κλύω σ’ ἐγ

ὼ μεμηνότ' οὐ σμικρὰν νόσον.
Your words declare you stricken with no slight madness.

532	νοσοῖμ' ἄν, εἰ νόσημα τοὺς ἐχθροὺς στυγεῖν.
Mad I may be—if it is madness to loathe one’s enemies.

533	εἴης φορητὸς οὐκ ἄν, εἰ πράσσοις καλῶς.
You would be unbearable if you were prosperous.

534	ὤμοι.
Alas!

535	ὤμοι;
Alas?

536	τόδε Ζεὺς τ- ἔπος οὐκ ἐπίσταται.
That is a word unknown to Zeus.

537	ἀλλ’ ἐκδιδάσκει πάνθ’ ὁ γηράσκων χρόνος.
But ever-ageing Time teaches all things.

538	καὶ μὴν σύ γ’ οὔπω σωφρονεῖν ἐπίστασαι.
Yes, but you at least have not yet learned to keep a sober mind.

539	σὲ γὰρ προσηύδων οὐκ ἂν ὄνθ’ ὑπηρέτην.
Or else I would not have addressed you, an underling.

540	ἐρεῖν ἔοικας οὐδὲν ὧν χρῄζει πατήρ.
It seems you will answer nothing that the Father demands.

541	καὶ μὴν ὀφείλων γ’ ἂν τίνοιμ’ αὐτῷ χάριν.
Yes, truly, I am his debtor and I should repay favor to him.

542	ἐκερτόμησας δῆθεν ὡς παῖδ’ ὄντα με.
You taunt me as though, indeed, I were a child.

543	οὐ γὰρ σὺ παῖς τε κ- ἔτι τοῦδ’ ἀνούστερος εἰ προσδοκᾷς ἐμοῦ τι πεύσεσθαι πάρα;
And are you not a child and even more witless than a child if you expect to learn anything from me?

544	οὐκ ἔστιν αἴκισμ’ οὐδὲ μηχάνημ’ ὅτῳ προτρέψεταί με Ζεὺς γεγωνῆσαι τάδε, πρὶν ἂν χαλασθῇ δεσμὰ λυμαντήρια.
There is no torment or device by which Zeus shall induce me to utter this until these injurious fetters are loosed.

545	πρὸς ταῦτα ῥιπτέσθω μὲν αἰθαλοῦσσα φλόξ, λευκοπτέρῳ δὲ νιφάδι καὶ βροντήμασι χθονίοις κυκάτω πάντα καὶ ταρασσέτω.
So then, let his blazing lightning be hurled, and with the white wings of the snow and thunders of earthquake let him confound the reeling world.

546	γνάμψει γὰρ οὐδὲν τῶνδέ μ’ ὥστε καὶ φράσαι πρὸς οὗ χρεών νιν ἐκπεσεῖν τυραννίδος.
For nothing of this shall bend my will even to tell at whose hands he is fated to be hurled from his sovereignty.

547	ὅρα νυν εἴ σοι ταῦτ’ ἀρωγὰ φαίνεται.
Look now whether this course seems to profit you.

548	ὦπται πάλαι δὴ καὶ βεβούλευται τάδε.
Long ago has this my course been foreseen and resolved.

549	τόλμησον, ὦ μάταιε, τόλμησόν ποτε πρὸς τὰς παρούσας πημονὰς ὀρθῶς φρονεῖν, ὀχλεῖς μάτην με κῦμ' ὅπως παρηγορῶν.
Bend your will, perverse fool, oh bend your will at last to wisdom in face of your present sufferings. In vain you trouble me, as though it were a wave you try to persuade.

550	εἰσελθέτω σε μήποθ' ὡς ἐγὼ Διὸς γνώμην φοβηθεὶς θηλύνους γενήσομαι, καὶ λιπαρήσω τὸν μέγα στυγούμενον γυναικομίμοις ὑπτιάσμασιν χερῶν λῦσαί με δεσμῶν τῶνδε.
Never think that, through terror at the will of Zeus, I shall become womanish and, with hands upturned, aping woman’s ways, shall importune my greatly hated enemy to release me from these bonds. I am far, far from that.

551	τοῦ παντὸς δέω.
I am far, far from that.

552	λέγων ἔοικα πολλὰ καὶ μάτην ἐρεῖν.
I think that by speaking much I will only speak in vain;

553	τέγγῃ γὰρ οὐδὲν οὐδὲ μαλθάσσῃ λιταῖς ἐμαῖς.
for you are not soothed nor are you softened by my entreaties.

554	δακὼν δὲ στόμιον ὡς νεοζυγὴς πῶλος βιάζῃ καὶ πρὸς ἡνίας μάχῃ.
You take the bit in your teeth like a new-harnessed colt and struggle against the reins.

555	ἀτὰρ σφοδρύνῃ γ' ἀσθενεῖ σοφίσματι.
Yet it is a paltry device that prompts your vehemence, for in the foolish-minded mere self-will of itself avails less than anything at all.

556	αὐθαδία γὰρ τῷ φρονοῦντι μὴ καλῶς αὐτὴ καθ' αὑτὴν οὐδενὸς

μεῖζον σθένει.
For in the foolish-minded mere self-will of itself avails less than anything at all.

557	σκέψαι δ', ἐὰν μὴ τοῖς ἐμοῖς πεισθῇς λόγοις, οἷός σε χειμὼν καὶ κακῶν τρικυμία ἔπεισ' ἄφυκτος.
But if you will not be won to belief by my words, think of what a tempest and a towering wave of woe shall break upon you past escape.

558	πρῶτα μὲν γὰρ ὀκρίδα φάραγγα βροντῇ καὶ κεραυνίᾳ φλογὶ πατὴρ σπαράξει τήνδε, καὶ κρύψει δέμας τὸ σόν, πετραία δ' ἀγκάλη σε βαστάσει.
First, the Father will shatter this jagged cliff with thunder and lightning-flame, and will entomb your frame, while the rock shall still hold you clasped in its embrace.

559	μακρὸν δὲ μῆκος ἐκτελευτήσας χρόνου ἄψορρον ἥξεις εἰς φάος.
But when you have completed a long stretch of time, you shall come back again to the light.

560	Διὸς δέ τοί πτηνὸς κύων, δαφοινὸς αἰετός, λάβρως διαρταμήσει σώματος μέγα ῥάκος, ἄκλητος ἕρπων δαιταλεὺς πανήμερος, κελαινόβρωτον δ’ ἧπαρ ἐκθοινήσεται.
Then indeed the winged hound of Zeus, the ravening eagle, coming an unbidden banqueter the whole day long, with savage appetite shall tear your body piecemeal into great rents and feast his fill upon your liver until it is black with gnawing.

561	τοιοῦδε μόχθου τέρμα μή τι προσδόκα, πρὶν ἂν θεῶν τις διάδοχος τῶν σῶν πόνων φανῇ, θελήσῃ τ’ εἰς ἀναύγητον μολεῖν Ἅιδην κνεφαῖά τ' ἀμφὶ Ταρτάρου βάθη.
Look for no term of this your agony until some god shall appear to take upon himself your woes and of his own free will descend into the sunless realm of Death and the dark deeps of Tartarus.

562	πρὸς ταῦτα βούλευ’ ·
Therefore be advised, 

563	ὡς ὅδ’ οὐ πεπλασμένος ὁ κόμπος , ἀλλὰ καὶ λίαν εἰρημένος ·
since this is no counterfeited vaunting but utter truth; 

564	ψευδηγορεῖν γὰρ οὐκ ἐπίσταται στόμα τὸ Δῖον , ἀλλὰ πᾶν ἔπος τελεῖ ·
for the mouth of Zeus does not know how to utter falsehood, but will bring to pass every word. 

565	σὺ δὲ πάπταινε καὶ φρόντιζε , μηδ’ αὐθαδίαν εὐβουλίας ἀμείνον’ ἡγήσῃ ποτέ .
May you consider warily and reflect, and never deem
stubbornness better than wise counsel.

566	ἡμῖν μὲν Ἑρμῆς οὐκ ἄκαιρα φαίνεται λέγειν.
To us, at least, Hermes seems not to speak untimely;

567	ἄνωγε γάρ σε τὴν αὐθαδίαν μεθέντ' ἐρευνᾶν τὴν σοφὴν εὐβουλίαν.
for he bids you to lay aside your stubbornness and seek the good counsel of wisdom.

568	πιθοῦ ·
Be advised!

569	σοφῷ γὰρ αἰσχρὸν ἐξαμαρτάνειν.
It is shameful for the wise to persist in error.

570	εἰδότι τοί μοι τάσδ' ἀγγελίας ὅδ' ἐθώυξεν ·
No news to me, in truth, is the message this fellow has proclaimed so noisily.

571	πάσχειν δὲ κακῶς ἐχθρὸν ὑπ' ἐχθρῶν οὐδὲν ἀεικές.
Yet for enemy to suffer ill from enemy is no disgrace.

572	πρὸς ταῦτ' ἐπ' ἐμοὶ ῥιπτέσθω μὲν πυρὸς ἀμφήκης βόστρυχος, αἰθὴρ δ' ἐρεθιζέσθω βροντῇ σφακέλῳ τ' ἀγρίων ἀνέμων ·
Therefore let the lightning’s forked curl be cast upon my head and let the sky be convulsed with thunder and the wrack of savage winds;

573	χθόνα δ' ἐκ πυθμένων αὐταῖς ῥίζαις πνεῦμα κραδαίνοι, κῦμα δὲ πόντου τραχεῖ ῥοθίῳ συγχώσειεν τῶν οὐρανίων ἄστρων διόδους ·
let the hurricane shake the earth from its rooted base, and let the waves of the sea mingle with their savage surge the courses of the stars in heaven;

574	εἴς τε κελαινὸν Τάρταρον ἄρδην ῥίψειε δέμας τ- ἐμὸν ἀνάγκης στερραῖς δίναις ·
and let him lift me on high and hurl me down to black Tartarus with the swirling floods of stern Necessity;

575	πάντως

 ἐμέ γ’ οὐ θανατώσει.
do what he will, me he shall never bring to death.

576	τοιάδε μέντοι τῶν φρενοπλήκτων βουλεύματ' ἔπη τ’ ἔστιν ἀκοῦσαι.
Such indeed are the thoughts and the words one hears from men deranged.

577	τί γὰρ ἐλλείπει μὴ οὐ παραπαίειν ἡ τοῦδ’ εὐχή;
Where does his prayer fall short of raving?

578	τί χαλᾷ μανιῶν;
Where does he abate his frenzy?

579	ἀλλ’ οὖν ὑμεῖς γ’ αἱ πημοσύναις συγκάμνουσαι ταῖς τοῦδε τόπων μετά ποι χωρεῖτ’ ἐκ τῶνδε θοῶς, μὴ φρένας ὑμῶν ἠλιθιώσῃ βροντῆς μύκημ' ἀτέραμνον.
But, at all events, may you who sympathize with his anguish, withdraw in haste from this spot so that the relentless roar of the thunder does not stun your senses.

580	ἄλλο τι φώνει καὶ παραμυθοῦ μ' ὅ τι καὶ πείσεις ·
Use some other strain and urge me to some other course in which you are likely to convince me.

581	οὐ γὰρ δή που τοῦτό γε τλητὸν παρέσυρας ἔπος.
This utterance in your flood of speech is, I think, past all endurance.

582	πῶς με κελεύεις κακότητ’ ἀσκεῖν;
How do you charge me to practise baseness?

583	μετὰ τοῦδ’ ὅ τι χρὴ πάσχειν ἐθέλω ·
With him I am content to suffer any fate;

584	τοὺς προδότας γὰρ μισεῖν ἔμαθον, κ- οὐκ ἔστι νόσος τῆσδ’ ἥντιν’ ἀπέπτυσα μᾶλλον.
for I have learned to detest traitors, and there is no pest I abhor more than this.

Hermes
585	ἀλλ’ οὖν μέμνησθ’ ἁ- ἐγὼ προλέγω μηδὲ πρὸς ἄτης θηραθεῖσαι μέμψησθε τύχην, μηδέ ποτ’ εἴπηθ’ ὡς Ζεὺς ὑμᾶς εἰς ἀπρόοπτον πῆμ’ εἰσέβαλεν ·
Well then, bear my warning in memory and do not blame your fortune when you are caught in the toils of calamity; nor ever say that it was Zeus who cast you into suffering unforeseen.

586	μὴ δῆτ’ αὐταὶ δ’ ὑμᾶς αὐτάς.
Not so, but blame yourselves.

587	εἰδυῖαι γὰρ κ- οὐκ ἐξαίφνης οὐδὲ λαθραίως εἰς ἀπέρατον δίκτυον ἄτης ἐμπλεχθήσεσθ’ ὑπ’ ἀνοίας.
For well forewarned, and not suddenly or secretly shall you be entangled in the inextricable net of calamity by reason of your folly.

588	καὶ μὴν ἔργῳ κ- οὐκέτι μύθῳ χθὼν σεσάλευται ·
Indeed, now it has passed from word to deed—the earth rocks,

589	βρυχία δ’ ἠχὼ παραμυκᾶται βροντῆς, ἕλικες δ’ ἐ

κλάμπουσι στεροπῆς ζάπυροι, στρόμβοι δὲ κόνιν εἱλίσσουσι ·
the echoing thunder-peal from the depths rolls roaring past me; the fiery wreathed lightning-flashes flare forth, and whirlwinds toss the swirling dust;

590	σκιρτᾷ δ’ ἀνέμων πνεύματα πάντων εἰς ἄλληλα στάσιν ἀντίπνουν ἀποδεικνύμενα ·
the blasts of all the winds leap forth and set in hostile array their embattled strife;

591	ξυντετάρακται δ’ αἰθὴρ πόντῳ.
the sky is confounded with the deep.

592	τοιάδ’ ἐπ’ ἐμοὶ ῥιπὴ Διόθεν τεύχουσα φόβον στείχει φανερῶς.
Behold, this stormy turmoil advances against me visibly, sent by Zeus to frighten me.

593	ὦ μητρὸς ἐμῆς σέβας, ὦ πάντων αἰθὴρ κοινὸν φάος εἱλίσσων, ἐσορᾷς μ’ ὡς ἔκδικα πάσχω.
O holy mother mine, O you firmament that revolves the common light of all, you see the wrongs I suffer!



