1	Ζεὺς μὲν ἀφίκτωρ ἐπίδοι προφρόνως στόλον ἡμέτερον νάιον ἀρθέντ’ ἀπὸ προστομίων λεπτοψαμάθων Νείλου.
May Zeus who guards suppliants look graciously upon our company, which boarded a ship and put to sea from the outlets of the fine sand of the Nile.

2	Δίαν δὲ λιποῦσαι χθόνα σύγχορτον Συρίᾳ φεύγομεν, οὔτιν’ ἐφ’ αἵματι δημηλασίαν ψήφῳ πόλεως γνωσθεῖσαν, ἀλλ’ αὐτογενεῖ φυξανορίᾳ γάμον Αἰγύπτου παίδων ἀσεβῆ ’ξ’ονοταζόμεναι.
For we have fled Zeus’ land whose pastures border Syria, and are fugitives, not because of some public decree pronounced against blood crime, but because of our own act to escape the suit of man, since we abhor as impious all marriage with the sons of Aegyptus.

3	Δαναὸς δὲ πατὴρ καὶ βούλαρχος καὶ στασίαρχος τάδε πεσσονομῶν κύδιστ’ ἀχέων ἐπέκρανε, φεύγειν ἀνέδην διὰ κῦμ’ ἅλιον, κέλσαι δ’ Ἄργους γαῖαν, ὅθεν δὴ γένος ἡμέτερον τῆς οἰστροδόνου βοὸς ἐξ ἐπαφῆς κ- ἐξ ἐπιπνοίας Διὸς εὐχόμενον τετέλεσται.
It was Danaus, our father, adviser and leader, who, considering well our course, decided, as the best of all possible evils, that we flee with all speed over the waves of the sea and find a haven on Argos’ shore. For from there descends our race, sprung from the caress and breath of Zeus on the gnat-tormented heifer.

4	τίν’ ἂν οὖν χώραν εὔφρονα μᾶλλον τῆσδ’ ἀφικοίμεθα σὺν τοῖσδ’ ἱκετῶν ἐγχειριδίοις ἐριοστέπτοισι κλάδοισιν;
To what kinder land than this could we come with these wool-wreathed branches in our hands, sole weapons of the suppliant?

5	ὦ πόλις, ὦ γῆ, καὶ λευκὸν ὕδωρ, ὕπατοί τε θεοί, καὶ βαρύτιμοι χθόνιοι θήκας κατέχοντες, καὶ Ζεὺς σωτὴρ τρίτος, οἰκοφύλαξ ὁσίων ἀν

δρῶν, δέξασθ' ἱκέτην τὸν θηλυγενῆ στόλον αἰδοίῳ πνεύματι χώρας ·
O realm, O land, and clear water; gods on high and earth-bound powers, grievous in your vengeance, which inhabit the tomb; and you, Zeus the Savior, invoked third, the guardian of the habitations of righteous men: receive as suppliants this band of women with the compassionate spirit of the land.

6	ἀρσενοπληθῆ δ’ ἑσμὸν ὑβριστὴν Αἰγυπτογενῆ, πρὶν πόδα χέρσῳ τῆ δ’ ἐν ἀσώδει θεῖναι, ξὺν ὄχῳ ταχυήρει πέμψατε πόντονδ’ ·
But the thronging swarm of violent men born of Aegyptus, should they set foot upon this marshy land, drive them seaward—and with them their swift ship—and there may they encounter a cruel sea with thunder, lightning, and rain-charged winds.

7	ἔνθα δὲ λαίλαπι χειμωνοτύπῳ, βροντῇ στεροπῇ τ’ ὀμβροφόροισίν τ’ ἀνέμοις ἀγρίας ἁλὸς ἀντήσαντες, ὄλοιντο, πρίν ποτε λέκτρων, ὧν θέμις εἴργει, σφετεριξάμενοι πατραδέλφειαν τήνδ’ ἀεκόντων ἐπιβῆναι.
and perish by the tempest’s buffeting blasts, if they ever lay their hands on us, their cousins, and mount unwilling beds from which Right holds them aloof.

8	νῦν δ’ ἐπικεκλομένα Δῖον πόρτιν ὑπερπόντιον τιμάορ’, ἶνίν τ’ ἀνθονομούσας προγόνου βοὸς ἐξ ἐπιπνοίας Ζηνὸς ἔφαψιν ·
And now I invoke, as our champion from beyond the sea, the calf born of Zeus, the offspring of the flower-grazing cow, our ancestress, the caress of Zeus’ breath.

9	ἐπωνυμίᾳ δ’ ἐπεκραίνετο μόρσιμος αἰὼν εὐλόγως, Ἔπαφόν τ’ ἐγέννασεν ·
The appointed period confirmed itself in a name suited to the event—Epaphus, to whom she gave birth.

10	ὅντ’ ἐπιλεξαμένα, νῦν ἐν ποιονόμοις ματρὸς ἀρχαίας τόποις τῶν πρόσθε πόνων μνασαμένα, τά τε νῦν ἐπιδείξω πιστὰ τεκμήρια γαιονόμοις, τὰ δ’ ἄελπτά περ ὄντα φανεῖται.
And now in the region wherein our first mother pastured, by recounting the story of her distress of long ago, I shall now set forth reliable proofs to the inhabitants of the land; and other evidence, though unexpected, will yet appear.

11	γνώσεται δὲ λόγους τις ἐν μάκει.
Men will come to know the truth as my tale proceeds.

12	εἰ δὲ κυρεῖ τις πέλας οἰωνοπόλων ἔγγαιος οἶκτον οἰκτρὸν ἀίων, δοξάσει τις ἀκούειν ὄπα τᾶς Τηρεΐας Μήτιδος οἰκτρᾶς ἀλόχου, κιρκηλάτου τ’ ἀηδόνος,
Now if by chance there be some neighbor in the land who knows the song of birds, when our complaint greets his ear, he will fancy that he hears the voice of Metis, Tereus’ piteous wife, the hawk-chased nightingale.

13	ἅτ’ ἀπὸ χλωρῶν πετάλων ἐργομένα πενθεῖ μὲν οἶκτον ἠθέων ·
For she, constrained to leave her green leaves, laments pitifully her accustomed haunts,

14	ξυντίθησι δὲ παιδὸς μόρον, ὡς αὐτοφόνως ὤ

λετο πρὸς χειρὸς ἕθεν δυσμάτορος κότου τυχών ·
and composes the tale of her own child’s doom—how he perished, destroyed by her own hand, victim of the wrath of an unnatural mother.

15	τὼς καὶ ἐγὼ φιλόδυρτος Ἰαονίοισι νόμοισι δάπτω τὰν ἁπαλὰν Νειλοθερῆ παρειὰν ἀπειρόδακρύν τε καρδίαν.
Even so I, indulging my grief in Ionian strains, pain my tender face summered by Nile’s sun and my heart unexercised in tears; and I gather the flowers of grief, anxious whether there is any friendly kinsman here to champion our band which has fled from the haze-shrouded land.

16	γοεδνὰ δ’ ἀνθεμίζομαι δειμαίνουσα φίλους, τᾶσδε φυγᾶς ἀερίας ἀπὸ γᾶς εἴ τις ἐστὶ κηδεμών.
But, gods of our race, hear, and regard with favor the cause of righteousness; if you refuse youthful fulfillment of its arrogant desires, and readily abhor violence, you would be righteous toward marriage.

17	ἀλλά, θεοὶ γενέται κλύετ’ εὖ τὸ δίκαιον ἰδόντες ·
Even for those who flee hard-pressed from war there is an altar, a shelter against harm through respect for the powers of heaven.

18	ἥβᾳ μὴ τέλεον δόντες ἔχειν παρ’ αἶσαν, ὕβριν δ’ ἑτοίμως στυγοῦντες, πέλοιτ’ ἂν ἔνδικοι γάμοις.
But may Zeus grant that it go well with us. For Zeus’ desire is hard to trace: it shines everywhere, even in gloom, together with fortune obscure to mortal men.

19	ἔστι δὲ κ- ἐκ πολέμου τειρομένοις βωμὸς ἀρῆς φυγάσιν ῥῦμα, δαιμόνων σέβας.
But may Zeus grant that it go well with us. For Zeus’ desire is hard to trace: it shines everywhere, even in gloom, together with fortune obscure to mortal men.

20	εὖ δ’ εἴη Διόθεν παναληθῶς.
But may Zeus grant that it go well with us. For Zeus’ desire is hard to trace: it shines everywhere, even in gloom, together with fortune obscure to mortal men.

21	Διὸς ἵμερος οὐκ εὐθήρατος ἐτύχθη.
For Zeus’ longing was not easily pursued.

22	παντᾷ τοι φλεγέθει κ- ἐν σκότῳ μελαίνᾳ ξὺν τύχᾳ μερόπεσσι λαοῖς.
It burns bright in every way and together with fate, even in black darkness, among mortal men.

23	πίπτει δ’ ἀσφαλὲς οὐδ’ ἐπὶ νώτῳ, κορυφᾷ Διὸς εἰ κρανθῇ, πρᾶγμα τέλειον.
Safely it falls, and not upon its back, whatever deed comes to pass at Zeus’ nod; for the pathways of his understanding stretch dark and tangled, beyond comprehension.

24	δαυλοὶ γὰρ πραπίδων δάσκιοί τε τείνουσιν πόροι κατιδεῖν ἄφραστοι.
From their high-towering hopes he hurls mankind to utter destruction; yet he does not marshal any armed violence—

25	ἰάπτει δ’ ἐλπίδων ἀφ’ ὑψιπύργων πανώλεις βροτούς, βίαν δ’ οὔτιν’ ἐξοπλίζει ·
all that is wrought by the powers divine is free from toil. Seated on his holy throne, unmoved, in mysterious ways he accomplishes his will.

26	πᾶν ἄπονον δαιμονίων.
All the work of the divine is effortless.

27	ἥμενος ὃν φρόνημά πως αὐτόθεν ἐξέπραξεν ἔμπας ἑδράνων ἐφ’ ἁγνῶν.
Seated on his holy throne, unmoved, in mysterious ways he accomplishes his will.

28	ἰδέσθω δ’ εἰς ὕβριν βρότειον, οἵα νεάζει πυθμὴν δι’ ἁμὸν γάμον τεθαλὼς δυσπαραβούλοισι φρεσίν, καὶ διάνοιαν μαινόλιν κέντρον ἔχων ἄφυκτον, ἄταν δ’ ἀπάτ

ᾳ μεταγνούς.
So let him look upon human outrageousness—in what way it shoots up men in their wooing of us, sprouted from thoughts of evil intent, having a frenzied purpose as its irresistible spur, and deluded, turning its thoughts to folly.

29	τοιαῦτα πάθεα μέλεα θρεομένα λέγω λιγέα βαρέα δακρυοπετῆ, ἰὴ ἰή, ἰηλέμοισιν ἐμπρεπῆ ·
Such piteous strains of woe I utter in my pain, now shrill, now deep, blended with falling tears—Alas, alas! groans appropriate to funeral wails; though I live, I chant my own dirge.

30	θρεομένη μέλη ζῶσα γόοις με τιμῶ.
Though I live, I chant my own dirge with laments.

31	ἱλεοῦμαι μὲν Ἀπίαν βοῦνιν, καρβᾶνα δ’ αὐδὰν εὖ, γᾶ, κοννεῖς.
I invoke Apia’s hilly land—for well, O land, you understand my barbarous speech—,

32	πολλάκι δ’ ἐμπίτνω ξὺν λακίδι λινοσινεῖ Σιδονία καλύπτρᾳ.
and many times I lay my hands upon my Sidonian veil and tear its linen fabric to shreds.

33	θεοῖς δ’ ἐναγέα τέλεα πελομένων καλῶς ἐπίδρομ’ ὁπόθι θάνατος ἀπῇ.
Sacrifices in satisfaction of vows are given freely to the gods when all fares well, if only there be escape from death.

34	ἰὼ ἰώ, ἰὼ δυσάγκριτοι πόνοι.
Alas, alas, perplexing troubles!

35	ποῖ τόδε κῦμ’ ἀπάξει;
Where will this wave of trouble bear me away?

36	ἱλεοῦμαι μὲν Ἀπίαν βοῦνιν, καρβᾶνα δ’ αὐδὰν εὖ, γᾶ, κοννεῖς.
I invoke Apia’s hilly land—for well, O land, you understand my barbarous speech—,

37	πολλάκι δ’ ἐμπίτνω ξὺν λακίδι λινοσινεῖ Σιδονίᾳ καλύπτρᾳ.
and many times I lay my hands upon my Sidonian veil and tear its linen fabric to shreds.


38 πλάτα μὲν οὖν λινορραφής τε δόμος ἅλα στέγων δορὸς ἀχείματόν μ’ ἔπεμπε σὺν πνοαῖς ·
Our oars, indeed, and our timbered ship, bound with yellow rope to withstand the sea, sped me on by help of favoring winds, unharmed by all tempests; 

39 οὐδὲ μέμφομαι ·
nor have I reason for complaint.

40 τελευτὰς δ’ ἐν χρόνῳ πατήρ μοι παντόπτας πρευμενεῖς κτίσειεν ,
And may the all-seeing Father establish a kindly issue in due time—

41 σπέρμα σεμνᾶς μέγα ματρὸς εὐνὰς ἀνδρῶν , ἒ ἔ , ἄγαμον ἀδάματον ἐκφυγεῖν .
That the mighty race of our honorable mother may escape the embrace of man (ah me), unwedded, unvanquished.

42 θέλουσα δ’ αὖ θέλουσαν ἁγνά μ’ ἐπιδέτω Διὸς κόρα , ἔχουσα σέμν’ ἐνώπι’ ἀσφαλῶς , παντὶ δὲ σθένει διωγμοῖς ἀσχαλῶσ’ ἀδμήτας ἀδμήτα ῥύσιος γενέσθω ,
And may Zeus’ pure daughter, she who holds securely the sacred wall, willingly, meeting my will, look upon me; and, grieved at our pursuit, come with all her might, a virgin to a virgin’s aid, to deliver me —

43 σπέρμα σεμνᾶς μέγα ματρὸς εὐνὰς ἀνδρῶν , ἒ ἔ , ἄγαμον ἀδάματον ἐκφυγεῖν .
That the mighty race of our honorable mother may escape the embrace of man (ah me), unwedded, unvanquished.

44 εἰ δὲ μή , μελανθὲς ἡλιόκτυπον γένος τὸν γάιον , τὸν πολυξενώτατον Ζῆνα τῶν κεκμηκότων ἱξόμεθα σὺν κλάδοις ἀρτάναις θανοῦσαι , μὴ τυχοῦσαι θεῶν Ὀλυμπίων .
Yet, if she will not, we, a dark, sun-burned race, with suppliant boughs will invoke the underworld Zeus, Zeus the great host of the dead; for if the gods of Olympus hear us not, we will hang ourselves.

45 ἆ Ζήν , Ἰοῦς ἰῷ μῆνις μάστειρ’ ἐκ θεῶν ·
Ah Zeus! On account of the poisonous hate of Io vengeance from the gods pursues us.

46 κοννῶ δ’ ἄγαν γαμετᾶς οὐρανόνι

κον.
I know your consort’s sky-conquering spite; for a stormy sea follows a harsh wind.

47 χαλεποῦ γὰρ ἐκ πνεύματος εἶσι χειμών.
For from a harsh spirit comes a stormy wind.

48 καὶ τότ’ οὐ δικαίοις Ζεὺς ἐνέξεται λόγοις, τὸν τᾶς βοὸς παῖδ’ ἀτιμάσας, τὸν αὐτός ποτ’ ἔκτισεν γόνῳ, νῦν ἔχων παλίντροπον ὄψιν ἐν λιταῖσιν;
And then would Zeus not be just in his words, dishonoring the child of the cow, whom he himself once created, now turning his gaze away in our supplications?

49 ὑψόθεν δ’ εὖ κλύοι καλούμενος.
May he hear us well from on high, as we call upon him.

50 ἆ Ζήν, Ἰοῦς ἰῶ, μῆνις μάστειρ’ ἐκ θεῶν ·
Ah Zeus, alas, alas, the avenger of wrath from the gods;

51 κοννῶ δ’ ἄγαν γαμετᾶς οὐρανόνικον χαλεποῦ γὰρ ἐκ πνεύματος εἶσι χειμών.
I know all too well the consort's sky-conquering anger, for from a harsh spirit comes a stormy wind.

52	παῖδες, φρονεῖν χρή ·
My children, you must be prudent.

53	ξὺν φρονοῦντι δ’ ἥκετε πιστῷ γέροντι τῷ δε ναυκλήρῳ πατρί.
A prudent captain of your voyage was your reliable old father here with whom you came.

54	καὶ τ- ἐπὶ χέρσου νῦν προμηθίαν λαβὼν αἰνῶ φυλάξαι τ- ἔμ’ ἔπη δελτουμένας.
And now that I have considered with foresight what may befall us here on land, I charge you, record my injunctions on the tablets of your minds and guard them.

55	ὁρῶ κόνιν, ἄναυδον ἄγγελον στρατοῦ ·
I see dust, the voiceless herald of an army;

56	σύριγγες οὐ σιγῶσιν ἀξονήλατοι ·
the axle-driven wheels are not silent in their sockets.

57	ὄχλον δ’ ὑπασπιστῆρα καὶ δορυσσόον λεύσσω, ξὺν ἵπποις καμπύλοις τ’ ὀχήμασιν ·
I behold a throng, armed with shields and holding spears, with steeds and curved chariots.

58	τάχ’ ἂν πρὸς ἡμᾶς τῆσδε γῆς ἀρχηγέται ὀπτῆρες εἶεν ἀγγέλων πεπυσμένοι.
Perhaps they are the princes of the land come to look on us, informed by messengers.

59	ἀλλ’ εἴτ’ ἀπήμων εἴτε καὶ τεθηγμένος ὠμῇ ξὺν ὀργῇ τόνδ’ ἐπόρνυται στόλον, ἄμεινόν ἐστι παντὸς εἵνεκ’, ὦ κόραι, πάγον προσίζειν τόνδ’ ἀγωνίων θεῶν.
But whether a harmless man or one driven by savage wrath rouses this expedition, it is better, damsels, in any case, to seat yourselves at that mound sacred to the assembled gods.

60	κρεῖσσον δὲ πύργου βωμός, ἄρρηκτον σάκος ἀλλ’ ὡς τάχιστα βᾶτε, καὶ λευκοστεφεῖς ἱκετηρίας, ἁγάλματ’ αἰδοίου Διός, σεμνῶς ἔχουσαι διὰ χερῶν εὐωνύμων, αἰδοῖα καὶ γοεδνὰ καὶ ζαχρε

ῖ’ ἔπη ξένους ἀμείβεσθ’, ὡς ἐπήλυδας πρέπει, τορῶς λέγουσαι τάσδ’ ἀναιμάκτους φυγάς.
Stronger than a castle is an altar—an impenetrable shield. As quick as you can, gather in your left hands your white-wreathed suppliant boughs, sacred emblems of Zeus the merciful. Reply to the strangers, as is fitting for aliens, in piteous and plaintive language of necessity, telling them clearly of your flight, how it was unstained by deed of blood.

61	φθογγῇ δ’ ἑπέσθω πρῶτα μὲν τὸ μὴ θρασύ, τὸ μὴ μάταιον δ’ ἐκ μετωποσωφρόνων ἴτω προσώπων ὄμματος παρ’ ἡσύχου.
Above all let no arrogance accompany your speech, and reveal nothing impious in your peaceful eyes, from your respectful face.

62	καὶ μὴ πρόλεσχος μηδ’ ἐφολκὸς ἐν λόγῳ γένῃ.
In your speech neither interrupt, nor hesitate—



63	τὸ τῇδε κάρτ’ ἐπίφθονον γένος.
for this would offend these people.

64	μέμνησο δ’ εἴκειν ·
And remember to be submissive: 

65	χρεῖος εἶ ξένη φυγάς.
you are an alien, a fugitive, and in need.

66	θρασυστομεῖν γὰρ οὐ πρέπει τοὺς ἥσσονας .
Bold speech does not suit the weak.

67	πάτερ , φρονούντως πρὸς φρονοῦντας ἐννέπεις .
Father, your words are prudent, and they fall on prudent ears.

68	φυλάξομαι δὲ τάσδε μεμνῆσθαι σέθεν κεδνὰς ἐφετμάς.
I will take heed of your wise words, and hold them in memory.

69	Ζεὺς δὲ γεννήτωρ ἴδοι ·
May Zeus, the author of our race, behold us!

70	ἴδοιτο δῆτα πρευμενοῦς ἀπ’ ὄμματος ·
May he indeed behold you, and with a gracious eye.

71	θέλοιμ’ ἂν ἤδη σοὶ πέλας θρόνους ἔχειν.
I would like even now to be seated by your side.

72	μή νυν σχόλαζε, μηχανῆς δ’ ἔστω κράτος.
Then do not delay, but put your purpose into action.

73	ὦ Ζεῦ, κόπων οἴκτιρε μὴ ἀπολωλότας.
O Zeus, have pity upon our troubles lest we are ruined.

74	κείνου θέλοντος εὖ τελευτήσει τάδε.
If he wishes it so, all will end well.

75	καὶ Ζηνὸς ὄρνιν τόνδε νῦν κικλῄσκετε.
Invoke now also that bird of Zeus.

76	καλοῦμεν αὐγὰς ἡλίου σωτηρίους, — ἁγνόν τ’ Ἀπόλλω, φυγάδ’ ἀπ’ οὐρανοῦ θεόν.
We invoke the saving beams of the sun, and pure Apollo too, who, though a god, was exiled once from heaven.

77	εἰδὼς ἂν α

ἶσαν τήνδε συγγνοίη βροτοῖς.
Knowing our lot, he may well have pity on mortals.

78	συγγνοῖτο δῆτα καὶ παρασταίη πρόφρων.
May he have pity indeed, and stand by ready to defend.

79	τίν’ οὖν κικλῄσκω τῶνδε δαιμόνων ἔτι;
Whom, further, of these divinities must I invoke?

80	ὁρῶ τρίαιναν τήνδε σημεῖον θεοῦ.
I behold a trident here, the token of its god.

81	ἀλλ’ εὖ τ’ ἔπεμψεν εὖ τε δεξάσθω χθονί.
Well did he send us here and well may he receive us in this land.

82	Ἑρμῆς ὅδ’ ἄλλος τοῖσιν Ἑλλήνων νόμοις.
Here, too, is Hermes, according to the Hellenic custom.

83	ἐλευθέροις νυν ἐσθλὰ κηρυκευέτω.
May he then announce good tidings to the free!

84	πάντων δ’ ἀνάκτων τῶνδε κοινοβωμίαν σέβεσθ’ ·
Honor to the mutual altar of all these protecting powers;

85	ἐν ἁγνῷ δ’ ἑσμὸς ὡς πελειάδων ἵζεσθε κίρκων τῶν ὁμοπτέρων φόβῳ, ἐχθρῶν ὁμαίμων καὶ μιαινόντων γένος.
and seat yourselves on holy ground like a flock of doves in dread of hawks of the same feathered tribe—kindred, yet foes, who would defile their

race.

86	ὄρνιθος ὄρνις πῶς ἂν ἁγνεύοι φαγών;
If bird prey on bird, how can it be pure?

87	πῶς δ’ ἂν γαμῶν ἄκουσαν ἄκοντος πάρα ἁγνὸς γένοιτ’ ἄν;
And how can man be pure who would seize from an unwilling father an unwilling bride?

88	οὐδὲ μὴ ’ν Ἅιδου θανὼν φύγῃ ματαίων αἰτίας, πράξας τάδε.
For such an act, not even in Hades, after death, shall he escape arraignment for outrage.

89	κ- ἐκεῖ δικάζει τ- ἀπλακήματʼ, ὡς λόγος, Ζεὺς ἄλλος ἐν καμοῦσιν ὑστάτας δίκας.
There also among the dead, so men tell, another Zeus holds a last judgment upon misdeeds.

90	σκοπεῖτε, κ- ἀμείβεσθε τόνδε τὸν τρόπον, ὅπως ἂν ὑμῖν πρᾶγος εὖ νικᾷ τόδε.
Take heed and reply in this manner, that victory may attend your cause.

91	ποδαπὸν ὅμιλον τόνδ’ ἀνελληνόστολον πέπλοισι βαρβάροισι καὶ πυκνώμασι χλίοντα προσφωνοῦμεν;
From where comes this band we address, clothed in foreign attire and luxuriating in closely-woven and barbaric robes? 

92	οὐ γὰρ Ἀργολὶς ἐσθὴς γυναικῶν οὐδ’ ἀφ’ Ἑλλάδος τόπων.
For your apparel is not that of the women of Argos, nor yet of any part of Hellas.

93	ὅπως δὲ χώραν οὔτε κηρύκων ὕπο, ἀπρόξενοί τε, νόσφιν ἡγητῶν, μολεῖν ἔτλητ’ ἀτρέστως, τοῦτο θαυμαστὸν πέλει.
How you have gained courage thus fearlessly to come to this land, unheralded and friendless and without guides, this makes me wonder.

94	κλάδοι γε μὲν δὴ κατὰ νόμους ἀφικτόρων κεῖνται παρ’ ὑμῖν πρὸς θεοῖς ἀγωνίοις;
And yet, truly, I see that branches usually carried by suppliants are laid by your side before the gods assembled here—as to this alone can Hellas guess with confidence.

95	μόνον τόδ’ Ἑλλὰς χθὼν συνοίσεται στόχῳ.
As for the rest, there is still much I should with reason leave to conjecture, if your voice were not here to inform me.

96	καὶ τ- ἄλλα πόλλ’ ἔτ’ εἰκάσαι δίκαιον ἦν, εἰ μὴ παρόντι φθόγγος ἦν ὁ σημανῶν.
You have not spoken falsely about our clothing.

97	εἴρηκας ἀμφὶ κόσμον ἀψευδῆ λόγον.
But, for my part, how am I to address you?

98	ἐγὼ δὲ πρὸς σὲ πότερον ὡς ἔτην λέγω, ἢ

ῥήτορ’ ἱεροράβδον, ἢ πόλεως ἀγόν;
As commoner, as spokesman, bearer of the sacred wand, or as ruler of the realm?

99	πρὸς ταῦτ’ ἀμείβου καὶ λέγ’ εὐθαρσὴς ἐμοί.
As for that, answer and speak to me with confidence.

100	τοῦ γηγενοῦς γάρ εἰμ’ ἐγὼ Παλαίχθονος ἶνις Πελασγός, τῆσδε γῆς ἀρχηγέτης.
For I am Pelasgus, offspring of Palaechthon, whom the earth brought forth, and lord of this land;

101	ἐμοῦ δ’ ἄνακτος εὐλόγως ἐπώνυμον γένος Πελασγῶν τήνδε καρποῦται χθόνα.
and after me, their king, is rightly named the race of the Pelasgi, who harvest the land.

102	καὶ πᾶσαν αἶαν, ἧς δι’ ἁγνὸς ἔρχεται Στρυμών, τὸ πρὸς δύνοντος ἡλίου, κρατῶ.
Of all the region through which the pure Strymon flows, on the side toward the setting sun, I am the lord.

103	ὁρίζομαι δὲ τήν τε Περραίβων χθόνα, Πίνδου τε τ- ἐπέκεινα, Παιόνων πέλας, ὄρη τε Δωδωναῖα.
There lies within the limits of my rule the land of the Perrhaebi, the parts beyond Pindus close to the Paeonians, and the mountain ridge of Dodona;

104	συντέμνει δ’ ὅρος ὑγρᾶς θαλάσσης ·
the edge of the watery sea borders my kingdom.

105	τῶνδε τ- ἐπὶ τάδε κρατῶ.
I rule up to these boundaries.

106	αὐτῆς δὲ χώρας Ἀπίας πέδον τόδε πάλαι κέκληται φωτὸς ἰατροῦ χάριν.
The ground where we stand is Apian land itself, and has borne that name since antiquity in honor of a healer.

107	Ἆπις γὰρ ἐλθὼν ἐκ πέρας Ναυπακτίας ἰατρόμαντ

ις παῖς Ἀπόλλωνος χθόνα τήνδ’ ἐκκαθαίρει κνωδάλων βροτοφθόρων, τὰ δὴ παλαιῶν αἱμάτων μιάσμασιν χρανθεῖσ’ ἀνῆκε γαῖα μηνιταῖ’ ἄχη δρακονθόμιλον δυσμενῆ ξυνοικίαν.
For Apis, coming from Naupactus in the far land, seer and healer, son of Apollo, purified this land of monsters deadly to man, which Earth, defiled by the pollution of ancient blood, had caused to spring up—plagues charged with wrath, an ominous colony of swarming serpents.

108	τούτων ἄκη τομαῖα καὶ λυτήρια πράξας ἀμέμπτως Ἆπις Ἀργείᾳ χθονὶ μνήμην ποτ’ ἀντίμισθον ηὕρετ’ ἐν λιταῖς.
Of these plagues Apis worked the cure by sorcery and spells to the content of the Argive land, and for reward thereafter earned for himself remembrance in prayers.

109	ἔχουσα δ’ ἤδη τ- ἄπʼ ἐμοῦ τεκμήρια γένος τ’ ἂν ἐξεύχοιο καὶ λέγοις πρόσω.
Now that you have my testimony, declare your lineage and speak further—

110	μακράν γε μὲν δὴ ῥῆσιν οὐ στέργει πόλις .
yet our people do not take pleasure in long discourse.

111	βραχὺς τορός θ’ ὁ μῦθος ·
Our tale is brief and clear.

112	Ἀργεῖαι γένος ἐξευχόμεσθα, σπέρματ’ εὐτέκνου βοός ·
Argives we claim to be by birth, offspring of a cow blest in its children.

113	καὶ ταῦτ’ ἀληθῆ πάντα προσφύσω λόγῳ.
And the truth of this I shall confirm in full.

114	ἄπιστα μυθεῖσθ’, ὦ ξέναι, κλύειν ἐμοί, ὅπως τόδ’ ὑμῖν ἐστιν Ἀργεῖον γένος.
Foreign maidens, your tale is beyond my belief—how your race can be from Argos.

115	Λιβυστικαῖς γὰρ μᾶλλον ἐμφερέστεραι γυναιξίν ἐστε κ- οὐδαμῶς ἐγχωρίαις.
For you are more similar to the women of Libya and in no way similar to those native to our land.

116	Καὶ Νεῖλος ἂν θρέψειε τοιοῦτον φυτόν, Κύπριος χαρακτήρ τ’

 ἐν γυναικείοις τύποις εἰκὼς πέπληκται τεκτόνων πρὸς ἀρσένων ·
The Nile, too, might foster such a stock, and like yours is the Cyprian impress stamped upon female images by male craftsmen.

117	τοίας τ’ ἀκούω νομάδας ἱπποβάμοσιν εἶναι καμήλοις ἀστραβιζούσας, χθόνα παρ’ Αἰθίοψιν ἀστυγειτονουμένας.
And of such aspect, I have heard, are nomad women, who ride on camels for steeds, having padded saddles, and dwell in a land neighboring the Aethiopians.

118	καὶ τὰς ἀνάνδρους κρεοβόρους τ’ Ἀμαζόνας, εἰ τοξοτευχεῖς ἦτε, κάρτ’ ἂν ᾔκασα ὑμᾶς.
And had you been armed with the bow, certainly I would have guessed you to be the unwed, flesh-devouring Amazons.

119	διδαχθεὶς δ’ ἂν τόδ’ εἰδείην πλέον, ὅπως γένεθλον σπέρμα τ’ Ἀργεῖον τὸ σόν.
But inform me, and I will better comprehend how it is that you trace your race and lineage from Argos.

120	κλῃδοῦχον Ἥρας φασὶ δωμάτων ποτὲ Ἰὼ γενέσθαι τῇ δ’ ἐν Ἀργείᾳ χθονί;
Is there a report that once in this land of Argos Io was ward of Hera’s house?

121	ἦν ὡς μάλιστα, καὶ φάτις πολλὴ κρατεῖ.
Certainly she was; the tradition prevails far and wide.

122	μὴ καὶ λόγος τις Ζῆνα μειχθῆναι βροτῷ;
And is there some story, too, that Zeus was joined in love with a mortal?

123	κ- ἄκρυπτα γ’ Ἥρας ταῦτα τ-

 ἀμπαλάγματα.
This entanglement was not secret from Hera.

124	πῶς οὖν τελευτᾷ βασιλέων νείκη τάδε;
What then was the result of this royal strife?

125	βοῦν τὴν γυναῖκ’ ἔθηκεν Ἀργεία θεός.
The goddess of Argos transformed the woman into a cow.

126	οὔκουν πελάζει Ζεὺς ἐπ’ εὐκραίρῳ βοΐ;
And while she was a horned cow, did not Zeus approach her?

127	φασίν, πρέποντα βουθόρῳ ταύρῳ δέμας.
So they say, making his form that of a bull lusting for a mate.

128	τί δῆτα πρὸς ταῦτ’ ἄλοχος ἰσχυρὰ Διός;
What answer then did Zeus’ stubborn consort give?

129	τὸν πάνθ’ ὁρῶντα φύλακ’ ἐπέστησεν βοΐ.
She placed the all-seeing one to stand watch over the cow.

130	ποῖον πανόπτην οἰοβουκόλον λέγεις;
What manner of all-seeing herdsman with a single duty do you mean?

131	Ἄργον, τὸν Ἑρμῆς παῖδα γῆς κατέκτανεν.
Argus, a son of Earth, whom Hermes slew.

132	τί οὖν ἔτευξεν ἄλλο δυσπότμῳ βοΐ;
What else did she contrive against the unfortunate cow?

133	βοηλάτην μύωπα κινητήριον.
A sting, torment of cattle, constantly driving her on.

134	οἶστρον καλοῦσιν αὐτὸν οἱ Νείλου πέλας.
They call it a gadfly, those who dwell by the Nile.

135	τοιγάρ νιν ἐκ γῆς ἤλασεν μακρῷ δρόμῳ.
Well then, it drove her by a long course out of the land.

136	καὶ ταῦτ’ ἔλεξας πάντα συγκόλλως ἐμοί.
Your account agrees with mine in all respects.

137	καὶ μὴν Κάνωβον κ- ἐπὶ Μέμφιν ἵκετο.
So she came to Canobus and to Memphis.

138	καὶ Ζεύς γ’ ἐφάπτωρ χειρὶ φιτύει γόνον.
And Zeus begot a son by the touching of his hand.

139	τίς οὖν ὁ Δῖος πόρτις εὔχεται βοός;
Who is it then that claims to be the cow's Zeus-begotten calf?

140	Ἔπαφος ἀληθῶς ῥυσίων ἐπώνυμος.
Epaphus, and truly named from laying on of hands.

141	Λιβύη, μέγιστον γῆς πέδον καρπουμένη.
And who was begotten of Epaphus? Libya, who reaps the fruit of the largest portion of the earth.

142	τίν’ οὖν ἔτ’ ἄλλον τῆσδε βλαστημὸν λέγεις;
What offspring, then, did Libya have?

143	Βῆλον δίπαιδα πατέρα τοῦδ’ ἐμοῦ πατρός.
Agenor was her first child born.

144	τὸ πάνσοφον νῦν ὄνομα τοῦτό μοι φράσον.
And who was his offspring?

145	Δαναός, ἀδελφὸς δ’ ἐστὶ πεντηκοντάπαις.
Belus, who had two sons and was father of my father here.

146	καὶ τοῦδ’ ἄνοιγε τ- ὄνομʼ ἀφθόνῳ λόγῳ.
Now tell me his wisely-given name.

147	Αἴγυπτος.
Reveal his name ungrudgingly.

148	εἰδὼς δ’ ἁμὸν ἀρχαῖον γένος πράσσοις ἂν ὡς Ἀργεῖον ἀνστήσῃς στόλον.
Aegyptus; and now that you know my ancient lineage, I pray you to help a band that is Argive by descent.

149	δοκεῖτε δή μοι τῆσδε κοινωνεῖν χθονὸς τ- ἀρχαῖον.
I think you indeed have some share in this land from old.

150	ἀλλὰ πῶς πατρῷα δώματα λιπεῖν ἔτλητε;
But how did you bring yourselves to leave the home of your fathers?

151	τίς κατέσκηψεν τύχη;
What stroke of fortune befell you?

152	ἄναξ Πελασγῶν, αἰόλ’ ἀνθρώπων κακά.
Lord of the Pelasgians, of varying color are the ills of mankind,

153	πόνου δ’ ἴδοις ἂν οὐδαμοῦ τ- αὐτὸν πτερόν;
and nowhere can you find trouble of the same plume.

154	ἐπεὶ τίς ηὔχει τήνδ’ ἀνέλπιστον φυγὴν κέλσειν ἐς Ἄργος κῆδος ἐγγενὲς τὸ πρίν, ἔχθει μεταπτοιοῦσαν εὐναίων γάμων;
For who dreamed that a kindred race, sprung of old, would thus in unexpected flight find haven at Argos, fleeing in terror through loathing of the marriage-bed?

155	τί φὴς ἱκνεῖσθαι τῶνδ’ ἀγωνίων θεῶν, λευκοστεφεῖς ἔχουσα νεοδρέπτους κλάδους;
Why have you come as suppliants of these gods congregated here, holding in your hands those white-wreathed, fresh-plucked boughs?

156	ὡς μὴ γένωμαι δμωὶς Αἰγύπτου γένει.
So as not to be made slave to Aegyptus’ race.

157	πότερα κατ’ ἔχθραν, ἢ τὸ μὴ θέμις λέγεις;
By reason of hatred? Or do you speak of unlawfulness?

158	τίς δ’ ἂν φίλους ὠνοῖτο τοὺς κε

κτημένους;
Who would purchase their lords from among their kin?

159	σθένος μὲν οὕτως μεῖζον αὔξεται βροτοῖς.
In this way families have enhanced their power.

160	καὶ δυστυχούντων γ’ εὐμαρὴς ἀπαλλαγή.
And it is easy then, if things go ill, to separate from a wife.

161	πῶς οὖν πρὸς ὑμᾶς εὐσεβὴς ἐγὼ πέλω;
How then am I to deal with you in accordance with my sacred duty?

162	αἰτοῦσι μὴ ’κδοὺς παισὶν Αἰγύπτου πάλιν.
By not surrendering us at the demand of Aegyptus’ sons.

163	βαρέα σύ γ’ εἶπας, πόλεμον ἄρασθαι νέον.
A serious request—to take upon myself a dangerous war.

164	ἀλλ’ ἡ δίκη γε ξυμμάχων ὑπερστατεῖ.
But Justice protects her champions.

165	εἴπερ γ’ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς πραγμάτων κοινωνὸς ἦν.
True, if she had a share in the matter from the beginning.

166	αἰδοῦ σὺ πρύμναν πόλεος ὧδ’ ἐστεμμένην.
Show reverence for the ship of state thus crowned.

167	πέφρικα λεύσσων τάσδ’ ἕδρας κατασκίους.
I shrink as I gaze upon these shaded shrines.

168	βαρύς γε μέντοι Ζηνὸς ἱκεσίου κότος.
Yet heavy is the wrath of Zeus, god of the suppliant.

169	Παλαίχθονος τέκος, κλῦθί μου πρόφρονι καρδίᾳ, Πελασγῶν ἄναξ.
Son of Palaechthon, lord of the Pelasgians, hear me with a benign heart.

170	ἴδε με τὰν ἱκέτιν φυγάδα περίδρομον, λυκοδίωκτον ὡς δάμαλ

ιν ἂμ πέτραις ἠλιβάτοις, ἵν’ ἀλκᾷ πίσυνος μέμυκε φράζουσα βοτῆρι μόχθους.
Behold me, your suppliant, a fugitive, running around like a heifer chased by wolves upon precipitous crags, where, confident in his help, she lows to tell the herdsman of her distress.

171	ὁρῶ κλάδοισι νεοδρόποις κατάσκιον νεύονθ’ ὅμιλον τόνδ’ ἀγωνίων θεῶν.
I see a company of assembled gods assenting beneath the shade of fresh-plucked boughs.

172	εἴη δ’ ἄνατον πρᾶγμα τοῦτ’ ἀστοξένων.
Nevertheless, may this affair of claimants to the friendship of our city bring no mischief in its wake!

173	μηδ’ ἐξ ἀέλπτων κ- ἀπρομηθήτων πόλει νεῖκος γένηται ·
And let no feud come upon the state from causes unforeseen and unforestalled;

174	τῶν γὰρ οὐ δεῖται πόλις.
for the state has no need of such trouble.

175	ἴδοιτο δῆτ’ ἄνατον φυγὰν ἱκεσία Θέμις Διὸς κλαρίου.
May Justice, daughter of Zeus the Apportioner, look upon our flight that it bring no mischief in its wake.

176	σὺ δὲ παρ’ ὀψιγόνου μάθε γεραιόφρων·
But you, aged in experience, learn from one of younger birth.

177	ποτιτρόπαιον αἰδόμενος οὖνπερ ἱεροδόκα θεῶν λήματ’ ἀπ’ ἀνδρὸς ἁγνοῦ.
If you show mercy to a suppliant, as is due, respecting the sacred will of the gods from a man of holiness.

178	οὔτοι κάθησθε δωμάτων ἐφέστιοι ἐμῶν.
It is not my own house at whose hearth you sit.

179	τὸ κοινὸν δ’ εἰ μιαίνεται πόλις, ξυνῇ μελέσθω λαὸς ἐκπονεῖν ἄκη.
If the state is stained by pollution in its commonalty, in common let the people strive to work out the cure.

180	ἐγὼ δ’ ἂν οὐ κραίνοιμ’ ὑπόσχεσιν πάρος, ἀστοῖς δὲ πᾶσι τῶνδε κοινώσας πέρι.
For myself, I will pledge no promise before I have communicated these events to all the citizens.

181	σύ τοι πόλις, σὺ δὲ τὸ δάμιον.
You are the state, you are the people.

182	πρύτανις ἄκριτος ὤν, κρατύνεις βωμόν, ἑστίαν χθονός, μονοψήφοισι νεύμασιν σέθεν, μονοσκήπτροισι δ’ ἐν θρόνοις χρέος πᾶν ἐπικραίνεις·
Being subject to no judge, you rule the altar, your country’s hearth by your will’s sole ordinance; and, enthroned in sole sovereignty, you determine every issue.

183	ἄγος φυλάσσου.
Beware pollution!

184	ἄγος μὲν εἴη τοῖς ἐμοῖς παλιγκότοις, ὑμῖν δ’ ἀρήγειν οὐκ ἔχω βλάβης ἄτερ.
Pollution on my enemies! But without harm I do not know how to help you.

185	οὐδ’ αὖ τόδ’ ε

ὖφρον, τάσδ’ ἀτιμάσαι λιτάς.
And yet again, it is not well advised to slight these supplications.

186	ἀμηχανῶ δὲ καὶ φόβος μ’ ἔχει φρένας δρᾶσαί τε μὴ δρᾶσαί τε καὶ τύχην ἑλεῖν.
I am perplexed, and fear possesses my soul whether to act, or not to act and take what fortune sends.

187	τὸν ὑψόθεν σκοπὸν ἐπισκόπει, φύλακα πολυπόνων βροτῶν, οἳ τοῖς πέλας προσήμενοι δίκας οὐ τυγχάνουσιν ἐννόμου.
Look to him who looks down from above, to him, the guardian of mortals sore-distressed, who appeal to their neighbors, yet do not obtain the justice that is their right.

188	μένει τοι Ζηνὸς ἱκταίου κότος δυσπαραθέλκτους παθόντος οἴκτοις.
The wrath of Zeus, the suppliant’s god, remains, and will not be softened by a sufferer’s complaints.

189	εἴ τοι κρατοῦσι παῖδες Αἰγύπτου σέθεν νόμῳ πόλεως, φάσκοντες ἐγγύτατα γένους εἶναι, τίς ἂν τοῖσδ’ ἀντιωθῆναι θέλοι;
If the sons of Aegyptus have authority over you by the law of your country, claiming that they are nearest of kin, who would wish to contest it?

190	δεῖ τοί σε φεύγειν κατὰ νόμους τοὺς οἴκοθεν, ὡς οὐκ ἔχουσιν κῦρος οὐδὲν ἀμφὶ σοῦ.
You must plead in accordance with the laws of the land you have fled, that they have no authority over you.

191	μή τί ποτ’ οὖν γενοίμαν ὑποχείριος κράτεσιν ἀρσένων.
Never, oh never, may I fall subject to the power and authority of these men.

192	ὕπαστρον δέ τοι μῆχαρ ὁρίζομαι γάμου δύσφρονος φυγάν·
I am determined to flee to escape this marriage that offends my soul, piloting my course by the stars.

193	ξύμμαχον δ’ ἑλόμενος δίκαν κρῖνε σέβας τὸ πρὸς θεῶν.
Take Justice as your ally, and render judgment for the cause deemed righteous by the gods.

194	οὐκ εὔκριτον τὸ κρῖμα.
The judgment is not easy—do not make me the judge.

195	μή μ’ αἱροῦ κριτήν.
I have declared already that, though I am ruler, I will not do this thing without the consent of my people.

196	εἶπον δὲ καὶ πρίν, οὐκ ἄνευ δήμου τάδε πράξαιμ’ ἄν, οὐδέ περ κρατῶν, μὴ καί ποτε εἴπῃ λεώς, εἴ πού τι μὴ τοῖον τύχοι, ἐπήλυδας τιμῶν ἀπώλεσας πόλιν.
lest hereafter, if any evil befall, the people should say, "You honored aliens and brought ruin upon your own land."

197 ἀμφοτέρους ὁμαίμων τάδ’ ἐπισκοπεῖ Ζεὺς ἑτερορρεπής, νέμων εἰκότως ἄδικα μὲν κακοῖς, ὅσια δ’ ἐννόμοις.
Kindred to both in blood, Zeus surveys both sides alike in this dispute with an impartial scale, apportioning, as is due, to the wicked their wrongdoing and to the godly their works of righteousness.

198 τί τῶνδ’ ἐξ ἴσου ῥεπομένων μεταλγεῖς τὸ δίκαιον ἔρξας;
When these things are thus equally balanced, why do you fear to act justly?

199 δεῖ τοι βαθείας φροντίδος σωτηρίου, δίκην κολυμβητῆρος, ἐς βυθὸν μολεῖν δεδορκὸς ὄμμα, μηδ’ ἄγαν ᾠνωμένον, ὅπως ἄνατα ταῦτα πρῶτα μὲν πόλει, αὐτοῖσί θ’ ἡμῖν ἐκτελευτήσει καλῶς, καὶ μήτε δῆρις ῥυσίων ἐφάψεται μήτ’ ἐν θεῶν ἕδραισιν ὧδ’ ἱδρυμένας ἐκδόντες ὑμᾶς τὸν πανώλεθρον θεὸν βαρὺν ξύνοικον θησόμεσθ’ ἀλάστορα, ὃς οὐδ’ ἐν Ἅιδου τὸν θανόντ’ ἐλευθεροῖ.
You need deep, lifesaving thought, like a diver to the bottom of the sea, clear-eyed, not overly confident, to ensure that these issues first end well for the city and for us, and that neither the wrath of the gods be kindled by our actions nor, by giving you up, we make our city the dwelling of an all-destructive, heavy curse, a vindictive god who does not even free his victim in death.

200 μῶν οὐ δοκεῖ δεῖν φροντίδος σωτηρίου;
Surely you cannot think there is no need of salutary counsel?

201 φρόντισον καὶ γενοῦ πανδίκως εὐσεβὴς πρόξενος ·
Consider the situation and become a universally just and pious protector.

202 τὰν φυγάδα μὴ προδῷς, τὰν ἕκαθεν ἐκβολαῖς δυσθέοις ὀρμέναν ·
Do not betray the fugitive, one who has fled from cruel banishments.

203 μηδ’ ἴδῃς μ’ ἐξ ἑδρᾶν πολυθέων ῥυσιασθεῖσαν, ὦ πᾶν κράτος ἔχων χθονός.
Nor let me be torn from these many-godded seats, you who hold all power over this land.

204 γνῶθι δ’ ὕβριν ἀνέρων καὶ φύλαξαι κότον.
Know the insolence of men and guard against their wrath.

205 μή τι τλῇς τὰν ἱκέτιν εἰσιδεῖν ἀπὸ βρετέων βίᾳ δίκας ἀγομέναν ἱππηδὸν ἀμπύκων, πολυμίτων πέπλων τ’ ἐπιλαβὰς ἐμῶν.
May you not endure to see the suppliant dragged away by force from these sacred seats, clutching at my many-folded robes in her distress.

206 ἴσθι γάρ ·
Be aware;

207 παισὶ τάδε καὶ δόμοις, ὁπότερ’ ἂν κτίσῃς, μένει ἄρ ἐκτίνειν ὁμοιΐαν θέμιν.
For these children and these homes, whatever you create, await to fulfill a similar fate.

208 τάδε φράσαι δίκαια Διόθεν κράτη.
Consider these things, just decrees from Zeus.

209 καὶ δὴ πέφρασμαι.
And now I have spoken.

210 δεῦρο δ’ ἐξοκέλλεται.
Hence it is driven forth.

211 ἢ τοῖσιν ἢ τοῖς πόλεμον αἴρεσθαι μέγαν πᾶσ’ ἔστ’ ἀνάγκη, καὶ γεγόμφωται σκάφος στρέβλαισι ναυτικαῖσιν ὡς προσηγμένον.
Either with these or those, it is necessary to undertake a great war, and the ship is fastened with naval cables as if moored.

212 ἄνευ δὲ λύπης οὐδαμοῦ καταστροφή.
Without sorrow, there is no turning back anywhere.

213 καὶ χρημάτων μὲν ἐκ δόμων πορθουμένων, ἄτην γε μείζω καὶ μέγ’ ἐμπλήσας γόμου γένοιτ’ ἂν ἄλλα Κτησίου Διὸς χάριν ·
And though wealth may be plundered from houses, causing greater ruin and filling with much sorrow, yet for the sake of Zeus the Guardian, another outcome may arise;

214 καὶ γλῶσσα τοξεύσασα μὴ τὰ καίρια, γένοιτο μύθου μῦθος ἂν θελκτήριος ἀλγεινὰ θυμοῦ κάρτα κινητήρια.
and a tongue that has misfired, not hitting the mark, may become a tale that soothes painful anger, stirring the heart deeply.

215 ὅπως δ’ ὅμαιμον αἷμα μὴ γενήσεται, δεῖ κάρτα θύειν καὶ πεσεῖν χρηστήρια θεοῖσι πολλοῖς πολλά, πημονῆς ἄκη.
To avoid the shedding of kindred blood, it is indeed necessary to sacrifice greatly and offer many propitiations to numerous gods, as a deliverance from impending harm.

216 ἦ κάρτα νείκους τοῦδ’ ἔσω παροίχομαι, θέλω δ’ ἄιδρις μᾶλλον ἢ σοφὸς κακῶν εἶναι.
Indeed, I willingly withdraw from this strife; I prefer to remain ignorant rather than be wise in the ways of evil.

217 γένοιτο δ’ εὖ παρὰ γνώμην ἐμήν.
May all go well, contrary to my expectation.

218 πολλῶν ἄκουσον τέρματ’ αἰδοίων λόγων.
Hear now the end of many revered words.

219 ἤκουσα, καὶ λέγοις ἄν.
I have heard, and you may speak.

220 οὔ με φεύξεται.
It shall not escape me.

221 ἔχω στρόφους ζώνας τε, συλλαβὰς πέπλων τάχ’ ἂν γυναιξὶ ταῦτα συμπρεπῆ πέλοι.
I have breast-bands and girdles, the clasps of robes, which might perhaps be suitable for women.

222	ἐκ τῶνδε τοίνυν , ἴσθι , μηχανὴ καλή — 
In these then, be sure, I have a beautiful instrument—

λέξον τίν’ αὐδὴν τήνδε γηρυθεῖσ’ ἔσῃ .

Tell me what speech you plan to utter.

223 εἰ μή τι πιστὸν τῷδ’ ὑποστήσεις στόλῳ — τί σοι περαίνει μηχανὴ συζωμάτων ;
If you do not uphold this group with a firm pledge, what will be the outcome of your strategem with these sashes?

224 νέοις πίναξι βρέτεα κοσμῆσαι τάδε.
To adorn these statues with new tablets.

225 αἰνιγματῶδες τ- ἔπος ·
Your speech is riddled;

226 ἀλλ’ ἁπλῶς φράσον.
but speak plainly.

227 ἐκ τῶνδ’ ὅπως τάχιστ’ ἀπάγξασθαι θεῶν.
To hang ourselves from these gods as quickly as possible.

228 ἤκουσα μαστικτῆρα καρδίας λόγον.
I have heard a heart-wrenching statement.

229 ξυνῆκας ·
You understand;

230 ὠμμάτωσα γὰρ σαφέστερον.
for I have made it clearer to your eyes.

231 καὶ πολλαχῇ γε δυσπάλαιστα πράγματα, κακῶν δὲ πλῆθος ποταμὸς ὣς ἐπέρχεται ·
And indeed, many things are hard to struggle with, and a multitude of evils approaches like a river;

232 ἄτης δ’ ἄβυσσον πέλαγος οὐ μάλ’ εὔπορον τόδ’ ἐσβέβηκα, κ- οὐδαμοῦ λιμὴν κακῶν.
I am embarked upon a sea of ruin, not at all easy to navigate, and nowhere is there a harbor from these evils.

233 εἰ μὲν γὰρ ὑμῖν μὴ τόδ’ ἐκπράξω χρέος, μίασμ’ ἔλεξας οὐχ ὑπερτοξεύσιμον.
For if I do not accomplish this task for you, the pollution you speak of is beyond all shooting range.

234 εἰ δ’ αὖθ’ ὁμαίμοις παισὶν Αἰγύπτου σέθεν σταθεὶς πρὸ τειχέων διὰ μάχης ἥξω τέλους, πῶς οὐχὶ τ- ἀνάλωμα γίγνεται πικρόν, ἄνδρας γυναικῶν οὕνεχ’ αἱμάξαι πέδον;
But if, siding with your kinsmen, the sons of Aegyptus, I come to battle before the walls, how will the cost not become bitter, spilling men's blood on account of women?

235 ὅμως δ’ ἀνάγκη Ζηνὸς αἰδεῖσθαι κότον ἱκτῆρος;
Nevertheless, it is necessary to revere the wrath of Zeus, the protector of suppliants.

236 ὕψιστος γὰρ ἐν βροτοῖς φόβος.
For it is the highest fear among mortals.

237 σὺ μέν, πάτερ γεραιὲ τῶνδε παρθένων, κλάδους τε τούτους αἶψ’ ἐν ἀγκάλαις λαβὼν βωμοὺς ἐπ’ ἄλλους δαιμόνων ἐγχωρίων θές, ὡς ἴδωσι τῆσδ’ ἀφίξεως τέκμαρ πάντες πολῖται, μηδ’ ἀπορριφθῇ ψόγος ἐμοῦ;
You then, old father of these maidens, quickly take these boughs in your arms and place them on other altars of the local gods, so that all the citizens may see a sign of your arrival and no reproach fall upon me.

238 κατ’ ἀρχῆς γὰρ φιλαίτιος λεώς.
For from the beginning, the people are fond of their own.

239 καὶ γὰρ τάχ’ ἄν τις οἰκτίσας ἰδὼν τάδε ὕβριν μὲν ἐχθήρειεν ἄρσενος στόλου, ὑμῖν δ’ ἂν εἴη δῆμος εὐμενέστερος;
Perhaps someone, moved to pity on seeing this, would hate the arrogance of the male group, and the people would be more favorable to you.

240 τοῖς ἥσσοσιν γὰρ πᾶς τις εὐνοίας φέρει.
For everyone bears goodwill to the weaker party.

241 πολλῶν τάδ’ ἡμῖν ἐστιν ἠξιωμένα, αἰδοῖον εὑρεθέντα πρόξενον λαβεῖν.
These are of great worth to us, to have found a revered protector.

242 ὀπάονας δὲ φράστοράς τ’ ἐγχωρίων ξύμπεμψον, ὡς ἂν τῶν πολισσούχων θεῶν βωμοὺς προνάους καὶ πολισσούχων ἕδρας εὕρωμεν, ἀσφάλεια δ’ ᾖ δι’ ἄστεως στείχουσι;
Also send attendants and guides from among the locals, so we may find the altars and seats of the city's protecting gods, ensuring safety as we walk through the city.

243 μορφῆς δ’ οὐχ ὁμόστολος φύσις.
For our nature is not of the same dress as our form.

244 Νεῖλος γὰρ οὐχ ὅμοιον Ἰνάχῳ γένος τρέφει.
For the Nile does not nurture a race similar to Inachus.

245 φύλαξαι μὴ θράσος τέκῃ φόβον;
Beware lest boldness gives birth to fear.

!
246 καὶ δὴ φίλον τις ἔκταν’ ἀγνοίας ὕπο.
And indeed, someone has unwittingly killed a loved one.

247 στείχοιτ’ ἄν, ἄνδρες;
Proceed then, men.

248 εὖ γὰρ ὁ ξένος λέγει.
For the stranger speaks well.

249 ἡγεῖσθε βωμοὺς ἀστικούς, θεῶν ἕδρας;
Lead the way to the city's altars, the seats of the gods.

250 καὶ ξυμβολοῦσιν οὐ πολυστομεῖν χρεὼν ναύτην ἄγοντας τόνδ’ ἐφέστιον θεῶν.
And those you meet, it is not necessary to engage in much talk while conducting this seafarer to the hearth of the gods.

251 τούτῳ μὲν εἶπας, καὶ τεταγμένος κίοι;
You have spoken to him, now let him go as instructed.

252 ἐγὼ δὲ πῶς δρῶ;
But what shall I do?

253 ποῦ θράσος νέμεις ἐμοί;
Where do you assign courage to me?

254 κλάδους μὲν αὐτοῦ λεῖπε, σημεῖον πόνου.
Leave the branches here, a token of your trouble.

255 καὶ δή σφε λείπω χειρὶ καὶ λόγοις σέθεν

.
And indeed, I leave them at your command, both with hand and word.

256 λευρὸν κατ’ ἄλσος νῦν ἐπιστρέφου τόδε.
Now turn to this white area around the sanctuary.

257 καὶ πῶς βέβηλον ἄλσος ἂν ῥύοιτό με;
And how could unholy ground protect me?

258 οὔτοι πτερωτῶν ἁρπαγαῖς σ’ ἐκδώσομεν.
Certainly, we will not surrender you to the ravishment of winged creatures.

259 ἀλλ’ εἰ δρακόντων δυσφρόνων ἐχθίοσιν;
But what if you face the hostility of malicious serpents?

260 εὔφημον εἴη τ- ἔπος εὐφημουμένῃ.
Let your words be auspicious as I speak auspiciously to you.

261 οὔτοι τι θαῦμα δυσφορεῖν φόβῳ φρενός.
It is no wonder to be troubled by fear in the mind.

262 ἀεί γ’ ἄναρκτόν ἐστι δεῖμ’ ἐξαίσιον.
Indeed, excessive fear is always uncontrolled.

263 σὺ καὶ λέγων εὔφραινε καὶ πράσσων φρένα.
You cheer my heart both by speaking and by acting.

264 ἀλλ’ οὔτι δαρὸν χρόνον ἐρημώσει πατήρ.
But your father will not leave you alone for long.

265 ἐγὼ δὲ λαοὺς συγκαλῶν ἐγχωρίους στείχω, τὸ κοινὸν ὡς ἂν εὐμενὲς τιθῶ;
I am going to call together the local people to make the masses friendly.

266 καὶ σὸν διδάξω πατέρα ποῖα χρὴ λέγειν.
And I will instruct your father in what he should say.

267 πρὸς ταῦτα μίμνε καὶ θεοὺς ἐγχωρίους λιταῖς παραιτοῦ τῶν σ’ ἔρως ἔχει τυχεῖν.
Remain here and beseech the local gods with prayers to grant what you desire.

268 ἐγὼ δὲ ταῦτα πορσυνῶν ἐλεύσομαι.
And I will come having arranged these things.

269 πειθὼ δ’ ἕποιτο καὶ τύχη πρακτήριος.
May persuasion and propitious fortune follow me.

270 ἄναξ ἀνάκτων, μακάρων μακάρτατε καὶ τελέων τελειότατον κράτος, ὄλβιε Ζεῦ, πιθοῦ τε καὶ γένει σῷ ἄλευσον ἀνδρῶν ὕβριν εὖ στυγήσας.
Lord of lords, most blessed among the blessed, power most perfect among the perfect, O blessed Zeus, hear! And from your offspring ward off in utter abhorrence the lust of men.

271 λίμνᾳ δ’ ἔμβαλε πορφυροειδεῖ τὰν μελανόζυγ’ ἄταν.
And into the purple sea cast their black-benched madness!

272 τὸ πρὸς γυναικῶν δ’ ἐπιδὼν παλαίφατον ἁμέτερον γένος φιλίας προγόνου γυναικὸς νέωσον εὔφρον’ αἶνον, γενοῦ πολυμνάστωρ, ἔφαπτορ Ἰοῦς ·
Look benignly upon the women’s cause, look upon our race ancient in story, and recall the happy tale of our ancestress, the woman of your love.

273 Δῖαί τοι γένος εὐχόμεθ’ εἶναι γᾶς ἀπὸ τᾶσδ’ ἄποικοι.
Show that you remember all, you who laid your hand upon Io. It is from Zeus that we claim descent, and it is from this, our homeland, that we went forth.

274 παλαιὸν, δ’ εἰς ἴχνος μετέσταν ματέρος ἀνθονόμους ἐπωπάς, λειμῶνα βούχιλον,

ἔνθεν Ἰὼ οἴστρῳ ἐρεθομένα φεύγει ἁμαρτίνοος, πολλὰ βροτῶν διαμειβομένα φῦλα, διχῇ δ’ ἀντίπορον γαῖαν ἐν αἴσᾳ διατέμνουσα πόρον κυματίαν ὁρίζει ·
I have come here to the prints of ancient feet, my mother’s, even to the region where she was watched while she browsed among the flowers— into that pasture, from which Io, tormented by the gad-fly’s sting, fled in frenzy, traversing many tribes of men, and according to fate, cut in two the surging strait, marking off the land upon the farther shore.

275 ἰάπτει δ’ Ἀσίδος δι’ αἴας μηλοβότου Φρυγίας διαμπάξ.
And through the land of Asia she gallops, straight through sheep-pasturing Phrygia,

276 περᾷ δὲ Τεύθραντος ἄστυ Μυσῶν, Λύδιά τε γύαλα, καὶ δι’ ὀρῶν Κιλίκων

Παμφύλων τε γένη διορνυμένα καί ποταμοὺς ἀενάους καὶ βαθύπλουτον χθόνα καὶ τὰν Ἀφροδίτας πολύπυρον αἶαν.
and she passes the city of Teuthras among the Mysians, and the hollow vales of Lydia, across the mountains of the Cilicians and the Pamphylians, speeding over ever-flowing rivers and earth deep and rich, and the land of Aphrodite that teems with wheat.

!
277 ἱκνεῖται δὴ σινουμένα βέλει βουκόλου πτερόεντος Δῖον πάμβοτον ἄλσος, λειμῶνα χιονόβοσκον, ὅντ’ ἐπέρχεται Τυφῶ μένος, ὕδωρ τε Νείλου νόσοις ἄθικτον, μαινομένα πόνοις ἀτίμοις ὀδύναις τε κεντροδαλήτισι, θυιὰς Ἥρας.
Harassed by the sting of the winged herdsman, she reaches the all-rich grove of Zeus

, a snow-fed pasture, assailed by Typho's rage, and the waters of the Nile, untouched by disease, tormented by her dishonorable toils and the agonizing pain of Hera's stinging scourge.

278 βροτοὶ δ’, οἳ γᾶς τότ’ ἦσαν ἔννομοι χλωρῷ δείματι θυμὸν πάλλοντ’ ὄψιν ἀήθη, βοτὸν ἐσορῶντες δυσχερὲς μειξόμβροτον, τὰν μὲν βοός, τὰν δ’ αὖ γυναικός;
And mortals, who then inhabited the land, were struck with green fear, their hearts trembling at the sight, beholding a difficult mixed-being, part cow, part woman.

279 τέρας δ’ ἐθάμβουν.
They were amazed at this monster.

280 καὶ τότε δὴ τίς ἦν ὁ θέλξας πολύπλαγκτον ἀθλίαν οἰστροδόνητον Ἰώ;
And then, who was it that soothed the far-wandering, wretched, gadfly-tormented Io?

281 δι’ αἰῶνος κρέων ἀπαύστου Ζεὺς Διὸς δ’ ἀπημάντῳ σθένει καὶ θείαις ἐπιπνοίαις παύεται, δακρύων δ’ ἀποστάζει πένθιμον αἰδῶ.
Through ceaseless ages, it was Zeus who, with his unerring power and divine inspiration, brought her to rest, and she shed sorrowful tears of relief.

282	λαβοῦσα δ’ ἕρμα Δῖον ἀψευδεῖ λόγῳ γείνατο παῖδ’ ἀμεμφῆ,
And taking Zeus as her support, according to a true story, she bore a blameless son,

283	δι’ αἰῶνος μακροῦ πάνολβον ·
Throughout long ages blessed.

284	ἔνθεν πᾶσα βοᾷ χθών, φυσιζόου γένος τόδε Ζηνός ἐστιν ἀληθῶς ·
All the earth cries aloud, "This is in very truth the offspring of life-giving Zeus;"

285	τίς γὰρ ἂν κατέπαυσεν Ἥρας νόσους ἐπιβούλους ;
For who else could have endured the suffering plotted by Hera?

286	Διὸς τόδ’ ἔργον καὶ τόδ’ ἂν γένος λέγων ἐξ Ἐπάφου κυρήσαις .
Call this the work of Zeus and this his race sprung from Epaphus and you will hit the truth.

287	τίν’ ἂν θεῶν ἐνδικωτέροισιν κεκλοίμαν εὐλόγως ἐπ’ ἔργοις ;
Which of the gods has accomplished deeds which, with good reason, warrant more justly my appeal to him?

288	αὐτὸς ὁ πατὴρ φυτουργὸς αὐτόχειρ ἄναξ γένους παλαιόφρων μέγας τέκτων, τὸ πᾶν μῆχαρ οὔριος Ζεύς.
Father himself and lord, he planted us with his own hand; he is the mighty fashioner of our race, ancient in wisdom, who devises everything, whose breath makes all things prosper, Zeus himself.

289	ὑπ’ ἀρχᾶς δ’ οὔ τινος θοά

289	ὑπ’ ἀρχᾶς δ’ οὔ τινος θοάζων τὸ μεῖον κρεισσόνων κρατύνει.
He does not sit upon his throne by mandate of another and hold his dominion beneath a mightier.

290	οὔτινος ἄνωθεν ἡμένου σέβει κράτη.
No one sits above him whose power he holds in awe.

291	πάρεστι δ’ ἔργον ὡς ἔπος σπεῦσαί τι τῶν βούλιος φέρει φρήν.
He speaks, and it is done—he hastens to execute whatever his counselling mind conceives.

292	θαρσεῖτε παῖδες.
Be of good cheer, my children.

293	εὖ τὰ τῶν ἐγχωρίων.
All goes well on the part of the citizens.

294	δήμου δέδοκται παντελῆ ψηφίσματα.
Decrees, carrying full authority, have been passed.

295	ὦ χαῖρε πρέσβυ, φίλτατ’ ἀγγέλλων ἐμοί ἔνισπε δ’ ἡμῖν ποῖ κεκύρωται τέλος, δήμου κρατοῦσα χεὶρ ὅπῃ πληθύνεται.
Chorus
Hail, our envoy, harbinger of tidings most welcome. But tell us—to what end has the decision been carried, and to what course does the majority of the people’s votes incline?

296	ἔδοξεν Ἀργείοισιν οὐ διχορρόπως, ἀλλ’ ὥστ’ ἀνηβῆσαί με γηραιᾷ φρενί.
Danaus
Action was taken by the Argives, not by any doubtful vote but in such a way as to make my aged heart renew its youth.

297	πανδημίᾳ γὰρ χερσὶ δεξιωνύμοις ἔφριξεν αἰθὴρ τόνδε κραινόντων λόγον.
For the air bristled with right hands held aloft as, in full vote, they ratified this resolution into law.

298	ἡμᾶς μετοικεῖν τῆσδε γῆς ἐλευθέρους κ- ἀρρυσιάστους ξύν τ’ ἀσυλίᾳ βροτῶν.
That we are settlers in this land, and are free, subject to no seizure, and secure from robbery of man.

299	καὶ μήτ’ ἐνοίκων μήτ’ ἐπηλύδων τινὰ ἄγειν.
That no one, native or alien, lead us captive.

300	ἐὰν δὲ προστιθῇ τὸ καρτερόν, τὸν μὴ βοηθήσαντα τῶνδε γαμόρων ἄτιμον εἶναι ξὺν φυγῇ δημηλάτῳ.
But, if they turn to violence, any landholder who refuses to rescue us, should both forfeit his rights and suffer public banishment.

301	τοιάνδ’ ἔπειθεν ῥῆσιν ἀμφ’ ἡμῶν λέγων ἄ

ναξ Πελασγῶν, ἱκεσίου Ζηνὸς κότον μέγαν προφωνῶν μήποτ’ εἰσόπιν χρόνου πόλιν παχῦναι, ξενικὸν ἀστικόν θ’ ἅμα λέγων διπλοῦν μίασμα πρὸ πόλεως φανὲν ἀμήχανον βόσκημα πημονῆς πέλειν.
Such was the persuasive speech that the king of the Pelasgians delivered on our behalf, uttering the solemn warning that never in the future should the city feed the great wrath of Zeus, protector of the suppliant; and declaring that, should a twofold defilement—from strangers and from natives at once—arise before the city, it would become fodder for distress past all relief.

302	τοιαῦτ’ ἀκούων χερσὶν Ἀργεῖος λεὼς ἔκραν’ ἄνευ κλητῆρος ὡς εἶναι τάδε.
Hearing these words, the Argive people, waiting for no proclamation of crier, voted by uplifted hand that this should be so.

303	δημηγόρους δ’ ἤκουσεν εὐπιθὴς στροφὰς δῆμος Πελασγῶν.
It was the Pelasgian people, won readily to assent, who heard the subtle windings of his speech.

304	Ζεὺς δ’ ἐπέκρανεν τέλος.
But it was Zeus who brought the end to pass.

305	ἄγε δή, λέξωμεν ἐπ’ Ἀργείοις εὐχὰς ἀγαθάς, ἀγαθῶν ποινάς.
Chorus
Come, let us invoke blessings upon the Argives in return for blessings.

306	Ζεὺς δ’ ἐφορεύοι ξένιος ξενίου στόματος τιμὰς ἐπ’ ἀληθείᾳ, τέρμον’ ἄμεμπτον προσαπαντᾶν.
And may Zeus, god of strangers, behold the offerings of gratitude voiced by a stranger’s lips, that they may in true fulfilment reach their perfect goal.

307	νῦν ὅτε καί, θεοὶ διογενεῖς, κλύοιτ’ εὐκταῖα γένει χεούσας.
Chorus
Divinely-born gods! Hear now as I pour forth libations for blessings upon our kindred.

308	μήποτε πυρίφατον γᾶν Πελασγίαν πόλιν τὸν ἄκορον βοᾶς, κτίσαι μάχλον Ἄπη, τὸν ἀρότοις θερίζοντα βροτοὺς ἐν ἄλλοις, οὕνεκ’ ᾤκτισαν ἡμᾶς, ψῆφον δ’ εὔφρον’ ἔθεντο, αἰδοῦνται δ’ ἱκέτας Διός, ποίμναν τάνδ’ ἀμέγαρτον.
Never may the wanton lord of war, insatiate of battle-cry, Ares, who reaps a human harvest in alien fields, destroy this Pelasgian land by fire; for they had compassion for us, and cast a vote in our favor, respecting our pitiable flock, suppliants in the name of Zeus.

309	οὐδὲ μετ’ ἀρσένων ψῆφον ἔθεντ’ ἀτιμώσαντες ἔριν γυναικῶν, Δῖον ἐπιδόμενοι πράκτορά τε σκοπὸν δυσπολέμητον, ὃν οὐ τίς ἂν δόμος ἔχοι ἐπ’ ὀρόφων μιαίνοντα.
Nor did they cast their votes for the side of the males, disregarding the women’s cause, since they honored the avenging eye of Zeus, against which there is no battling, and what house would have it defiling its roof?

310	βαρὺς δ’ ἐφίζει.
For he sits heavily upon it.

311	ἅζονται γὰρ ὁμαίμους Ζηνὸς ἵκτορας ἁγνοῦ.
They take reverent heed of their kin, petitioners of holy Zeus;

312	τοιγάρτοι καθαροῖσι βωμοῖς θεοὺς ἀρέσονται.
therefore with pure altars shall they please the gods.

313	τοιγὰρ ὑποσκίων ἐκ στομάτων ποτάσθω φιλότιμος εὐχά, μήποτε λοιμὸς ἀνδρῶν τάνδε πόλιν κενώσαι.
Therefore let there fly forth from our overshadowed lips a prayer of gratitude. Never may pestilence empty this city of its men

314	μηδ’ ἐπιχωρίοις ἔρις πτώμασιν αἱματίσαι πέδον γᾶς.
nor strife stain the soil of the land with the blood of slain inhabitants.

315	ἥβας δ’ ἄνθος ἄδρεπτον ἔστω, μηδ’ Ἀφροδίτας εὐνάτωρ βροτολοιγὸς Ἄρης κέρσειεν ἄωτον.
But may the flower of its youth be unplucked, and may Ares, the partner of Aphrodite’s bed, he who makes havoc of men, not shear off their bloom.

316	καὶ γεραροῖσι πρεσβυτοδόκοι γεμόντων θυμέλαι φλεγόντων.
And may the altars, where the elders gather, blaze in honor of venerable men.

317	τὼς πόλις εὖ νέμοιτο Ζῆνα μέγαν σεβόντων, τὸν ξένιον δ’ ὑπερτάτως, ὃς πολιῷ νόμῳ αἶσαν ὀρθοῖ.
Thus may their state be regulated well, if they hold in awe mighty Zeus, and, most of all, Zeus the warden of the guest, who by venerable enactment guides destiny straight.

318	τίκτεσθαι δ’ ἐφόρους γᾶς ἄλλους εὐχόμεθ’ ἀεί, Ἄρτεμιν δ’ Ἑκάταν γυναικῶν λόχους ἐφορεύειν.
We pray that other guardians be always renewed, and that Artemis-Hecate watch over the childbirth of their women.

319	μηδέ τις ἀνδροκμὴς λοιγὸς ἐπελθέτω τάνδε πόλιν δαΐζων, ἄχορον ἀκίθαριν δακρυογόνον Ἄρη βοάν τ’ ἔνδημον ἐξοπλίζων.
And let no murderous havoc come upon the realm to ravage it, by arming Ares—foe to the dance and lute, parent of tears—and the shout of civil strife.

320	νούσων δ’ ἑσμὸς ἀπ’ ἀστῶν ἵζοι κρατὸς ἀτερπής.
And may the joyless swarm of diseases settle far from the heads of the inhabitants,

321	εὐμενὴς δ’ ὁ Λύκειος ἔστω πάσᾳ νεολαίᾳ.
and to all the young people may Lyceus be graciously disposed.

322	καρποτελῆ δέ τοι Ζεὺς ἐπικραινέτω φέρματι γᾶν πανώρῳ.
May Zeus cause the earth to bring forth its tribute of fruit by the produce of every season;

323	πρόνομα δὲ βότ’ ἀγροῖς πολύγονα τελέθοι.
may their grazing cattle in the fields have abundant increase,

324	τὸ πᾶν τ’ ἐκ δαιμόνων λάχοιεν.
and may they obtain all things from the heavenly powers.

325	εὔφαμον δ’ ἐπὶ βωμοῖς μοῦσαν θείατ’ ἀοιδοί.
May minstrels sing hymns of praise at the altars;

326	ἁγνῶν τ’ ἐκ στομάτων φερέσθω φάμα φιλοφόρμιγξ.
and from pure lips let there proceed the phorminx-loving chant.

327	φυλάσσοι τ’ ἀτρεμαῖα τιμὰς τὸ δάμιον, τὸ πτόλιν κρατύνει, προμαθὶς εὐκοινόμητις ἀρχά.
May the people who control the state guard its privileges free from fear— a prudent government counselling wisely for the public prosperity.

328	ξένοισί τ’ εὐξυμβόλους, πρὶν ἐξοπλίζειν Ἄρη, δίκας ἄτερ πημάτων διδοῖεν.
And should they have recourse to arms may they inflict no loss, but grant just rights of covenant to the stranger within their gates.

329	θεοὺς δ’, οἳ γᾶν ἔχουσιν ἀεὶ τίοιεν ἐγχωρίοις πατρῴαις δαφνηφόροις βουθύτοισι τιμαῖς.
And may they worship forever the gods who possess the land with native honors of laurel bough held aloft, and oxen slain, even as their fathers did before their time.

330	τὸ γὰρ τεκόντων σέβας τρίτον τόδ’ ἐν θεσμίοις Δίκας γέγραπται μεγιστοτίμου.
Since reverence for parents stands written third among the statutes of Justice, to whom honor supreme is due.

331	εὐχὰς μὲν αἰνῶ τάσδε σώφρονας, φίλαι.
Danaus
I commend these sensible prayers, dear children;

332	ὑμεῖς δὲ μὴ τρέσητ’ ἀκούσασαι πατρὸς ἀπροσδοκήτους τούσδε καὶ νέους λόγους.
but do not be troubled yourselves when you hear the unexpected and startling tidings your father has to tell.

333	ἱκεταδόκου γὰρ τῆσδ’ ἀπ

ὸ σκοπῆς ὁρῶ τὸ πλοῖον.
From my post of look-out here on the sanctuary of suppliants I see that ship; 

334	εὔσημον γὰρ οὔ με λανθάνει.
for it is well-marked and does not escape me:

335	στολμοί τε λαίφους καὶ παραρρύσεις νεώς, καὶ πρῷρα πρόσθεν ὄμμασιν βλέπουσ’ ὁδόν, οἴακος εὐθυντῆρος ὑστάτου νεὼς ἄγαν καλῶς κλύουσα, τοῖσιν οὐ φίλη.
the trimming of its sail, its side-guards, and the prow that with its eyes scans its onward course, obeying—all too well for those to whom it is unfriendly—the guiding rudder at the stern.

336	πρέπουσι δ’ ἄνδρες νάιοι μελαγχίμοις γυίοισι λευκῶν ἐκ πεπλωμάτων ἰδεῖν, καὶ τ- ἄλλα πλοῖα πᾶσά θ’ ἡ ’πικουρία εὔπρεπτος.
The men on board are plainly seen, their black limbs showing from their white attire. The rest of the ships and all the assisting fleet stand clear in view:

337	αὐτὴ δ’ ἡγεμὼν ὑπὸ χθόνα στείλασα λαῖφος παγκρότως ἐρέσσεται.
but the leading ship herself has furled her sail and draws near the shore with full sweep of sounding oars.

338	ἀλλ’ ἡσύχως χρὴ καὶ σεσωφρονισμένως πρὸς πρᾶγμ’ ὁρώσας τῶνδε μὴ ἀμελεῖν θεῶν.
Yet you must face the matter calmly and with self-control, and not be unmindful of these gods.

339	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀρωγοὺς ξυνδίκους θ’ ἥξω λαβών.
For my part, I will secure allies and advocates to urge our cause, and return.

340	

ἴσως γὰρ ἂν κῆρυξ τις ἢ πρέσβη μόλοι, ἄγειν θέλοντες ῥυσίων ἐφάπτορες.
Perhaps some herald or envoys may come, eager to seize you as a prize and drag you away, but nothing will happen: do not fear them.

341	ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν ἔσται τῶνδε.
Yet in the event that we should be slow in bringing aid, it would be better not to forget for a moment the means of help you have here at hand.

342	μὴ τρέσητέ νιν.
Courage!

343	ὅμως δ’ ἄμεινον, εἰ βραδύνοιμεν βοῇ, ἀλκῆς λαθέσθαι τῆσδε μηδαμῶς ποτε.
In good time, assuredly, and on the day ordained, he who dishonors the gods will suffer punishment.

344	θάρσει.
Father, I am afraid.

345	χρόνῳ τοι κυρίῳ τ’ ἐν ἡμέρᾳ θεοὺς ἀτίζων τις βροτῶν δώσει δίκην.
With what swift wings the ships approach! There is not much time left.

346	πάτερ , φοβοῦμαι , νῆες ὡς ὠκύπτεροι ἥκουσι ·
Father, I am afraid. With what swift wings the ships approach! 

347	μῆκος δ’ οὐδὲν ἐν μέσῳ χρόνου .
There is not much time left.

348	περίφοβόν μ’ ἔχει τάρβος ἐτητύμως πολυδρόμου φυγᾶς ὄφελος εἴ τί μοι.
I am possessed by dreadful fear if truly my long flight has been of no profit.

349	παροίχομαι, πάτερ, δείματι.
Father, I am consumed with fright.

350	ἐπεὶ τελεία ψῆφος Ἀργείων, τέκνα, θάρσει, μαχοῦνται περὶ σέθεν, σάφ’ οἶδ’ ἐγώ.
Danaus
Since the vote of the Argives was final, be of good cheer, my children; they will fight in your defense, I know this well.

351	ἐξῶλές ἐστι μάργον Αἰγύπτου γένος μάχης τ’ ἄπληστον;
Chorus
Abominable is the lustful race of Aegyptus and insatiate of battle; and you know that all too well.

352	καὶ λέγω πρὸς εἰδότα.
And I say this knowing that you understand.

353	δοριπαγεῖς δ’ ἔχοντες κυανώπιδας νῆας ἔπλευσαν ὧδ’ ἐπιτυχεῖ κότῳ πολεῖ μελαγχίμῳ σὺν στρατῷ.
In ships, stout-timbered and dark-prowed, they have sailed here, attended by a mighty black host, and in their wrath overtaken us.

354	πολλοὺς δέ γ’ εὑρήσουσιν ἐν μεσημβρίας θάλπει βραχίον’ εὖ κατερρινημένους.
Danaus
But they will find here a force with arms well-seasoned by the noonday heat.

355	μόνην δὲ μὴ πρόλειπε;
Chorus
Do not leave me forlorn, 

356	λίσσομαι, πάτερ.
I implore you, father.

357	γυνὴ μονωθεῖσ’ οὐδέν;
A woman abandoned to herself is nothing.

358	οὐκ ἔνεστ’ Ἄρης.
There is no Ares in her.



359	οὐλόφρονες, δὲ καὶ δολιομήτιδες δυσάγνοις φρεσίν, κόρακες ὥστε, βωμῶν ἀλέγοντες οὐδέν.
They are of evil mind, and guileful of purpose, with impure hearts, thinking no more of altars than carrion birds.

360	καλῶς ἂν ἡμῖν ξυμφέροι ταῦτ’ ὦ τέκνα, εἰ σοί τε καὶ θεοῖσιν ἐχθαιροίατο.
Danaus
This would profit us well, my children, should they incur both Heaven’s hate and yours.

361	οὐ μὴ τριαίνας τάσδε καὶ θεῶν σέβη δείσαντες ἡμῶν χεῖρ’ ἀπόσχωνται, πάτερ.
Chorus
Father, no fear of tridents or of things held sacred in the sight of Heaven will ever keep their hands from us.

362	περίφρονες δ’ ἄγαν ἀνιέρῳ μένει μεμαργωμένοι κυνοθρασεῖς, θεῶν οὐδὲν ἐπαΐοντες.
They are overweening, maddened, with unholy rage, shameless dogs that do not respect the gods.

363	ἀλλ’ ἔστι φήμη τοὺς λύκους κρείσσους κυνῶν εἶναι;
Danaus
Yet there is a saying that wolves are stronger than dogs; 

364	βύβλου δὲ καρπὸς οὐ κρατεῖ στάχυν.
the papyrus-fruit does not conquer the wheat-ear.

365	ὡς καὶ ματαίων ἀνοσίων τε κνωδάλων ἔχοντας ὀργάς, χρὴ φυλάσσεσθαι τάχος.
Chorus
Since they have the tempers of lewd and impious beasts, we must guard against them quickly.

366	οὔτοι ταχεῖα ναυτικοῦ στρατοῦ στολή, οὐδ’ ὅρμος, οὗ δεῖ πεισμάτων σωτήρια ἐς γῆν ἐνεγκεῖν, οὐδ’ ἐν ἀγκυρουχίαις θαρσοῦσι ναῶν ποιμένες παραυτίκα, ἄλλως τε καὶ μολόντες ἀλίμενον χθόνα ἐς νύκτ’ ἀποστείχοντος ἡλίου.
Danaus
A fleet in getting under way is not so speedy, nor yet in anchoring, when the securing cables must be brought ashore; and even at anchorage shepherds of ships do not feel immediately secure, above all if they have arrived on a harborless coast when the sun is sinking into night.

367	φιλεῖ ὠδῖνα τίκτειν νὺξ κυβερνήτῃ σοφῷ.
In a cautious pilot night is likely to beget anxiety.

368	οὕτω γένοιτ’ ἂν οὐδ’ ἂν ἔκβασις στρατοῦ καλή, πρὶν ὅρμῳ ναῦν θρασυνθῆναι.
Then, too, the disembarking of an army cannot be effected with success before a ship has gained confidence in her moorings.

369	σὺ δὲ φρόνει μὲν ὡς ταρβοῦσα μὴ ἀμελεῖν θεῶν;
But, for all your terror, remember not to neglect the gods.

370	πράξας ἀρωγήν;
Danaus
I will return when I have secured aid. 



371	ἄγγελον δ’ οὐ μέμψεται πόλις γέρονθ’, ἡβῶντα δ’ εὐγλώσσῳ φρενί.
Chorus
The city will find no fault with a messenger, old in years, but with youth in his heart and on his tongue.

372	ἰὼ γᾶ βοῦνι, πάνδικον σέβας, τί πεισόμεσθα;
O land of hills, land of our righteous veneration, what is to be our lot? 

373	ποῖ φύγωμεν Ἀπίας χθονός, κελαινὸν εἴ τι κεῦθός ἐστί που;
Chorus
To what region in the Apian land are we to flee, if anywhere there be some dark hiding-place?

374	μέλας γενοίμαν καπνὸς νέφεσσι γειτονῶν Διός;
Ah that I might become black smoke that draws near to the clouds of Zeus;

375	τὸ πᾶν δ’ ἄφαντος ἀμπετὴς ἀιδνὸς ὡς κόνις ἄτερθε πτερύγων ὀλοίμαν.
or, soaring aloft without wings, vanish out of sight like viewless dust and dissolve into nothingness!

376	ἄφυκτον δ’ οὐκέτ’ ἂν πέλοι κακόν;
The evil is no longer escapable;

377	κελαινόχρως δὲ πάλλεταί μου καρδία .
my heart is darkened and trembling; 

378	πατρὸς σκοπαὶ δέ μ’ εἷλον ·
the look-out my father held has brought me ruin. 

379	οἴχομαι φόβῳ .
I am undone with terror. 

380	θέλοιμι δ’ ἂν μορσίμου βρόχου τυχεῖν ἐν ἀρτάναις , πρὶν ἄνδρ’ ἀπευκτὸν τῷδε χριμφθῆναι χροΐ .
Rather would I meet my doom in a noose than suffer the embraces of a man I loathe. 

381	πρόπαρ θανούσας δ’ Ἀίδας ἀνάσσοι .
Death before that, with Hades for my lord and master!

378 πατρὸς σκοπαὶ δέ μ’ εἷλον.
My father's watchful care has captured me;

379 οἴχομαι φόβῳ.
I am overwhelmed with fear.

380 θέλοιμι δ’ ἂν μορσίμου βρόχου τυχεῖν ἐν ἀρτάναις, πρὶν ἄνδρ’ ἀπευκτὸν τῷδε χριμφθῆναι χροΐ.
I would rather meet my fate in a deadly noose than to be clasped in the arms of a man so abhorrent.

381 πρόπαρ θανούσας δ’ Ἀίδας ἀνάσσοι.
Death before that, with Hades for my lord and master!

382 πόθεν δέ μοι γένοιτ’ ἂν αἰθέρος θρόνος, πρὸς ὃν νέφη μυδηλὰ γίγνεται χιών, ἢ λισσὰς αἰγίλιψ ἀπρόσδεικτος οἰόφρων κρεμὰς γυπιὰς πέτρα, βαθὺ πτῶμα μαρτυροῦσά μοι, πρὶν δαΐκτορος βίᾳ καρδίας γάμου κυρῆσαι;
Ah, that somewhere in the upper air I might find a seat against which the dank clouds turn into snow, or some bare, inaccessible crag, beyond sight, brooding in solitude, to bear witness to my plunge before I am forced into a marriage that would pierce my heart!

383 κυσὶν δ’ ἔπειθ’ ἕλωρα κ- ἐπιχωρίοις ὄρνισι δεῖπνον οὐκ ἀναίνομαι πέλειν.
Thereafter I refuse not to become a prey for dogs and a banquet for the local birds;

384 τὸ γὰρ θανεῖν ἐλευθεροῦται φιλαιάκτων κακῶν.
for death is freedom from misery-loving evils.

385 ἐλθέτω ἐλθέτω μόρος, πρὸ κοίτας γαμηλίου τυχών.
Come, come, death, before the marriage-bed!

386 ἀμφυγᾶς τίν’ ἔτι πόρον τέμνω γάμου λυτῆρα;
How can I yet find some means of escape to deliver me from marriage?

387 ἴυζε δ’ ὀμφὰν οὐρανίαν μέλεα μέλη λιτανὰ θεοῖς.
Shriek aloud, with a cry that reaches heaven, strains of supplication to the gods;

388 τέλεα δέ πως πελόμενά μοι λύσιμά τ’ ἄχιμά τ’ ἔπιδε, πάτερ, βίαια μὴ φαιδρῶς ὁρῶν ὄμμασιν ἐνδίκοις.
O father, give heed that they are somehow accomplished to my safety and tranquility. Behold deeds of violence with no kind glance in your just eyes!

389 σεβίζου δ’ ἱκέτας σέθεν, γαιάοχε παγκρατὲς Ζεῦ.
Have respect for your suppliants, O Zeus, omnipotent upholder of the land!

390 γένος γὰρ Αἰγύπτειον ὕβριν δύσφορον ἀρσενογενὲς μετά με δρόμοισι διόμενοι φυγάδα μάταισι πολυθρόοις βίαια δίζηνται λαβεῖν.
For the males of the race of Aegyptus, intolerable in their wantonness, chase after me, a fugitive, with clamorous lewdness and seek to lay hold of me with violence.

391 σὸν δ’ ἐπίπαν ζυγὸν ταλάντου.
But yours alone is the beam of the balance,

392 τί δ’ ἄνευ σέθεν θνατοῖσι τέλειόν ἐστιν;
and without you what is accomplished for mortals?

393 ό ό ό, ά ά ά;
Ho! Ha!

394 ὅδε μάρπτις νάιος γάιος.
Here on the land is the pirate from the ship!

395 τῶν πρό, μάρπτι, κάμνοις;
Before that, pirate, may you perish...

396 ἰόφ..
I see...

397 ὀμ..
...in this...

398 αὖθι κάκκας νυ δυϊαν βοᾶν ἀμφαίνω.


399 ὁρῶ τάδε φροίμια πράξαν πόνων βιαίων ἐμῶν.
...the prelude of suffering wrought by violence.
400 ἠὲ ἠέ.
Oh! Oh! 
401 βαῖνε φυγᾷ πρὸς ἀλκάν;
Fly for protection!

402 βλοσυρόφρονα χλιδᾷ δύσφορα ναῒ κ- ἐν γᾷ.
Savagery beyond bearing... by its insolence on sea and land alike.

403 γαϊάναξ προτάσσου.
Lord of the land, protect us!

404	σοῦσθε σοῦσθ’ ἐπὶ βᾶριν ὅπως ποδῶν ἔχετε οὐκοῦν οὐκοῦν τιλμοὶ τιλμοὶ καὶ στιγμοί , πολυαίμων φόνιος ἀποκοπὰ κρατός .
Away with you, away to the ship...
I order you to stop your shrieking.

405	σοῦσθε σοῦσθ’ ὀλύμεναι ὀλόμεν’ ἐπαμίδα .
... Ho there! leave the sanctuary: be off to the ship! 

406	εἴθ’ ἀνὰ πολύρυτον ἁλμήεντα πόρον δεσποσίῳ ξὺν ὕβρει , γομφοδέτῳ τε δόρει διώλου .
407	αἵμονες ὡς ἐπάμιδα ησυδουπιάπιτα κελεύω βοᾶν μεθέσθαι ἴχαρ φρενί τ’ ἄταν .
408	ἰοὺ ἰού .
409	λεῖφ’ ἕδρανα , κί’ ἐς δόρυ .
410	ἀτίετον ἄπολιν οὐ σέβω .
I do not respect one without honor and city.

411	μήποτε πάλιν ἴδοιμ’ ἀλφεσίβοιον ὕδωρ , ἔνθεν ἀεξόμενον ζώφυτον αἷμα βροτοῖσι θάλλει .
Never again may my eyes behold
the cattle-nurturing stream from which increase comes to men and vigor of the blood of life. 

412	ἔγγαιος ἐγὼ βαθυχαῖος βαθρείας βαθρείας , γέρον .
I am a native here, of ancient nobility . . . old man.
413	σὺ δ’ ἐν ναῒ ναῒ βάσῃ τάχα θέλεος ἀθέλεος , βίᾳ βίᾳ τε πολλᾷ φροῦδα .
You will get yourself speedily on board, on board, I say, whether you will or not, by force, by force. . . .
414	βάτεαι βαθυμιτροκακὰ παθῶν ὀλόμεναι παλάμαις .


415	αἰαῖ αἰαῖ .
Alas, alas! 

416	αἲ γὰρ δυσπαλάμως ὄλοιο δι’ ἁλίρρυτον ἄλσος , κατὰ Σαρπηδόνιον χῶμα πολύψαμμον ἀλαθεὶς Εὐρεΐαισιν αὔραις .
So may you perish past all help, driven from your course over the surging waves by eastern breezes off the sandy tomb of Sarpedon!

417	ἴυζε καὶ λάκαζε καὶ κάλει θεούς.
Wail and shout and call upon the gods—

418	Αἰγυπτίαν γὰρ βᾶριν οὐχ ὑπερθορῇ.
you will not escape the Egyptian ship.

419	ἴυζε καὶ βόα, χέον πικρότερον οἰζύος νόμον.
Cry out, utter a strain of woe more bitter still.

420	οἰοῖ οἰοῖ, λύμας, ᾇ σὺ πρὸ γᾶς ὑλάσκων περί, χάμψα, βρυάζεις.
Alas, alas the brutal outrage with which, you crocodile, you boast arrogantly, bellowing on the sea.

421	ὃς ἐπωπᾷ σ’, ὁ μέγας Νεῖλος, ὑβρίζοντά σ’ ἀποτρέψειεν ἄιστον ὕβριν.
May the mighty Nile, who watches you, overwhelm your arrogance and destroy you.

422	βαίνειν κελεύω βᾶριν εἰς ἀμφίστροφον ὅσον τάχιστα.
Go to the double-prowed ship as quickly as possible.

423	μηδέ τις σχολαζέτω.
Let no one delay,

424	ὁλκὴ γὰρ οὔτοι πλόκαμον οὐδάμ’ ἅζεται.
for dragging by force has no mercy on locks of hair.

425	οἰοῖ, πάτερ, βρέτεος ἄρος ἀτᾷ μ’.
Alas, father; the help of the sacred images deludes me.

426	·

427	ἅλαδ’ ἄγει ἄραχνος ὡς βάδην.
Like a spider, he is carrying me seaward step by step—

428	ὄναρ ὄναρ μέλαν, ὀτοτοτοτοῖ, μᾶ Γᾶ μᾶ Γᾶ, βοὰν φοβερὸν ἀπότρεπε, ὦ πᾶ, Γᾶς παῖ, Ζεῦ.
a nightmare, a black nightmare! Oh! Oh! Mother Earth, mother Earth, avert his fearful cries! O father Zeus, son of Earth!

429	οὔτοι φοβοῦμαι δαίμονας τοὺς ἐνθάδε.
I do not fear the native gods, be assured.

430	οὐ γάρ μ’ ἔθρε

ψαν, οὐδ’ ἐγήρασαν τροφῇ.
They did not rear me, nor by their nurture did they bring me to old age.

431	μαιμᾷ πέλας δίπους ὄφις.
He rages close to me, the two-footed serpent.

432	ἔχιδνα δ’ ὥς μέ τις πόδα δακοῦσ’ ἔχει.
Like some viper he lays hold of me and bites my foot.

433	ὀτοτοτοτοῖ, μᾶ Γᾶ μᾶ Γᾶ βοὰν φοβερὸν ἀπότρεπε, ὦ πᾶ, Γᾶς παῖ, Ζεῦ.
Alas, alas! Mother Earth, mother Earth, avert his fearful cries! O father Zeus, son of Earth!

434	εἰ μή τις ἐς ναῦν εἶσιν αἰνέσας τάδε, λακὶς χιτῶνος ἔργον οὐ κατοικτιεῖ.
If you will not resign yourself and get to the ship, rending will have no pity on the fabric of your garments.

435	διωλόμεσθ’.
We are lost!

436	ἄσεπτ’, ἄναξ, πάσχομεν — πολλοὺς ἄνακτας, παῖδας Αἰγύπτου τάχα ὄψεσθε.
O King, we are suffering impious violence! You will soon see many kings in Aegyptus’ sons.

437	θαρσεῖτ’, οὐκ ἐρεῖτ’ ἀναρχίαν.
Be of good cheer: you will not have to blame lack of government.

438	ἰὼ πόλεως ἀγοὶ πρόμοι, δάμναμαι.
Listen! Chiefs and rulers of the city, I am threatened with violence!

439	ἕλξειν ἔοιχ’ ὑμᾶς ἀποσπάσας κόμης, ἐπεὶ οὐκ ἀκούετ’ ὀξὺ τῶν ἐμῶν λόγων.
I think I will have to seize you by the hair and drag you off since you are slow to heed my orders.

440	οὗτος, τί ποιεῖς;
You there! What are you doing?

441	ἐκ ποίου φρονήματος ἀνδρῶν Πελασγῶν τήνδ’

ἀτιμάζεις χθόνα;
What kind of arrogance has incited you to do such dishonor to this realm of Pelasgian men?

442	ἀλλ’ ἦ γυναικῶν ἐς πόλιν δοκεῖς μολεῖν;
Indeed, do you think you have come to a land of women?

443	κάρβανος ὢν δ’ Ἕλλησιν ἐγχλίεις ἄγαν;
For a barbarian dealing with Hellenes, you act insolently.

444	καὶ πόλλ’ ἁμαρτὼν οὐδὲν ὤρθωσας φρενί.
Many are the misses of your wits, and your hits are none.

445	τί δ’ ἠμπλάκηται τῶνδ’ ἐμοὶ δίκης ἄτερ;
And in this case where have I gone wrong and transgressed my right?

446	ξένος μὲν εἶναι πρῶτον οὐκ ἐπίστασαι.
First of all, you do not know how to act as a stranger.

447	πῶς δ’ οὐχί;
I not know? How so?

448	τ- ἔμʼ ὀλωλόθ’ εὑρίσκων ἄγω.
When I simply find and take my own that I had lost?

449	ποίοισιν εἰπὼν προξένοις ἐγχωρίοις;
To what patrons of your land was your notice given?

450	Ἑρμῇ μεγίστῳ προξένῳ μαστηρίῳ.
To Hermes, the Searcher, greatest of patrons.

451	θεοῖσιν εἰπὼν τοὺς θεοὺς οὐδὲν σέβῃ.
For all your notice to the gods, you do them no reverence.

452	τοὺς ἀμφὶ Νεῖλον δαίμονας σεβίζομαι.
I revere the deities by the Nile.

453	οἱ δ’ ἐνθάδ’ οὐδέν, ὡς ἐγὼ σέθεν κλύω;
While ours are nothing, as I understand you?

454	ἄγοιμ’ ἄν, εἴ τις τάσδε μὴ ’ξαιρήσεται.
I shall carry off these maids unless someone tears them away.

455	κλάοις ἄν, εἰ ψαύσειας, οὐ μάλ’ ἐς μακράν.
If you so much as touch them, you will regret it, and right soon.

456	ἤκουσα τ- ἔπος δ’ οὐδαμῶς φιλόξενον.
I hear you; and your speech is far from hospitable.

457	οὐ γὰρ ξενοῦμαι τοὺς θεῶν συλήτορας.
No, since I have no hospitality for despoilers of the gods.

458	λέγοιμ’ ἂν ἐλθὼν παισὶν Αἰγύπτου τάδε.
I will go and tell Aegyptus’ sons about this.

459	ἀβουκόλητον τοῦτ’ ἐμῷ, φρονήματι.
My proud spirit will not ponder on this threat.

460	ἀλλ’ ὡς ἂν εἰδὼς ἐννέπω σαφέστερον, — καὶ γὰρ πρέπει κήρυκ’ ἀπαγγέλλειν τορῶς ἕκαστα, — πῶς φῶ, πρὸς τίνος τ’ ἀφαιρεθεὶς ἥκειν γυναικῶν αὐτανέψιον στόλον?
But that I may know and tell a plainer tale —for it is fitting that a herald make exact report on each detail—what message am I to deliver? Who is it, am I to tell on my return, that has despoiled me of this band of women, their own cousins?

461	οὔτοι δικάζει ταῦτα μαρτύρων ὕπο Ἄρης;
It is not, I suppose, by voice of witnesses that the god of battle judges cases like this;

462	τὸ νεῖκος δ’ οὐκ ἐν ἀργύρου λαβῇ ἔλυσεν;
nor is it by the gift of silver that he settles dispute;

463	ἀλλὰ πολλὰ γίγνεται πάρος πεσήματ’ ἀνδρῶν κ- ἀπολακτισμοὶ βίου.
no! If that be the case, many a one shall fall and shuffle off his life.

464	τί σοι λέγειν χρὴ τ- ὄνομʼ;
My name? Why should I tell you?

465	ἐν χρόνῳ μαθὼν εἴσῃ σύ τ’ αὐτὸς κ- οἱ ξυνέμποροι σέθεν.
In due course of time you will learn it, you and your companions.

466	ταύτας δ’ ἑκούσας μὲν κατ’ εὔνοιαν φρενῶν ἄγοις ἄν, εἴπερ εὐσεβὴς πίθοι λόγος.
As for these maids, if, convinced by god-fearing argument, they consent of their own free will and heartily, you may take them.

467	τοία δὲ δημόπρακτος ἐκ πόλεως μία ψῆφος κέκρανται, μήποτ’ ἐκδοῦναι βίᾳ στόλον γυναικῶν.
But to this purpose a decree has been passed by the unanimous resolve of the people of the State, never, under compulsion, to surrender this association of women.

468	τῶνδ’ ἐφήλωται τορῶς γόμφος διαμπάξ, ὡς μένειν ἀραρότως.
Through their resolve the rivet has been driven home, to remain fixed and fast.

469	ταῦτ’ οὐ πίναξίν ἐστιν ἐγγεγραμμένα οὐδ’ ἐν πτυχαῖς βίβλων κατεσφραγισμένα, σαφῆ δ’ ἀκούεις ἐξ ἐλευθεροστόμου γλώσσης.
Not on tablets is this inscribed, nor has it been sealed in folds of books: you hear the truth from free-spoken lips.

470	κομίζου δ’ ὡς τάχιστ’ ἐξ ὀμμάτων.
Now get out of my sight immediately!

471	ἔοιγμεν ἤδη πόλεμον ἀρεῖσθαι νέον.
I think we are about to involve ourselves in a new war.

472	εἴη δὲ νίκη καὶ κράτη τοῖς ἄρσεσιν.
But may victory and authority rest with the men!

473	ἀλλ’ ἄρσενάς τοι τῆσδε γῆς οἰκήτορας εὑρήσετ’ οὐ πίνοντας ἐκ κριθῶν μέθυ.
It is men, I believe, you will find in the dwellers of this land; and they are no drinkers of diluted wine.

474	ὑμεῖς δὲ πᾶσαι σὺν φίλαις ὀπάοσι θράσος λαβοῦσαι στείχετ’ εὐερκῆ πόλιν, πύργων βαθείᾳ μηχανῇ κεκλῃμένην.
But you, all of you, along with your handmaidens, take courage and proceed to our well-fenced town, encircled by sturdy devices of towers.

475	καὶ δώματ’ ἐστὶ πολλὰ μὲν τὰ δήμια, δεδωμάτωμαι δ’ οὐδ’ ἐγὼ σμικρᾷ χερί.
As for places inside to lodge, there are plenty of the public sort. For on no modest scale do I myself live,

476	ἔνθ’ ὑμίν ἐστιν εὐτύκους ναίειν δόμους πολλῶν μετ’ ἄλλων.
where, in company with many others, you may occupy abodes suitably prepared;

477	εἰ δέ τις μείζων χάρις, πάρεστιν οἰκεῖν καὶ μονορρύθμους δόμους.
or, if it is more pleasing to you, it is free for you also to make your home in dwellings of separate sort.

478	τούτων τὰ λῷστα καὶ τὰ θυμηδέστατα πάρεστι, λωτίσασθε.
Of these select what is best and most to your desires.

479	προστάτης δ’ ἐγὼ ἀστοί τε πάντες, ὧνπερ ἥδε κραίνεται ψῆφος.
A protector you have in me and in all the inhabitants, whose resolve this is that now takes effect.

480	τί τῶνδε κυριωτέρους μένεις;
Why wait for others of higher authority?

481	ἀλλ’ ἀντ’ ἀγαθῶν ἀγαθοῖσι βρύοις, δῖε Πελασγῶν.
In blessings may you abound, noble Pelasgian, in requital for your blessings!

482	πέμψον δὲ πρόφρων δεῦρ’ ἡμέτερον πατέρ’ εὐθαρσῆ Δαναόν, πρόνοον καὶ βούλαρχον.
But, if it pleases you, send our brave father Danaus here to be our adviser and leader of our counsels.

483	τοῦ γὰρ προτέρα μῆτις, ὅπου χρὴ δώματα ναίειν καὶ τόπος εὔφρων.
For it befits him, rather than ourselves, to advise us where we should establish our home and what neighborhood is friendly.

484	πᾶς τις ἐπειπεῖν ψόγον ἀλλοθρόοις εὔτυκος;
All the world is ready to cast reproach on those who speak a foreign tongue.

485	εἴη δὲ τὰ λῷστα.
But may all be for the best!

486	σύν τ’ εὐκλείᾳ καὶ ἀμηνίτῳ βάξει λαῶν ἐγχώρων τάσσεσθε , φίλαι δμωίδες , οὕτως ὡς ἐφ’ ἑκάστῃ διεκλήρωσεν Δαναὸς θεραποντίδα φερνήν .
And you, dear handmaidens, preserving your fair fame and provoking no angry utterances on the part of the native folk, take up your stations even as Danaus has allotted her duty of attendance unto each.

486 σύν τ’ εὐκλείᾳ καὶ ἀμηνίτῳ βάξει λαῶν ἐγχώρων τάσσεσθε, φίλαι δμωίδες, οὕτως ὡς ἐφ’ ἑκάστῃ διεκλήρωσεν Δαναὸς θεραποντίδα φερνήν.
Align yourselves with both the fame and the peaceful conduct of the local people, dear handmaidens, according to the allotment Danaus has made for each of you.

487 ὦ παῖδες, Ἀργείοισιν εὔχεσθαι χρεών, θύειν τε λείβειν θ’, ὡς θεοῖς, Ὀλυμπίοις, σπονδάς, ἐπεὶ σωτῆρες οὐ διχορρόπως.
O children, it is right to pray to the Argives, to sacrifice and pour libations to them, as to the Olympian gods, for they are our unquestionable saviors.

488 καί μου τὰ μὲν πραχθέντα πρὸς τοὺς ἐγγενεῖς φίλους πικρῶς ἤκουσαν αὐτανεψίοις.
They heard bitterly of the deeds done against our kinfolk by their own cousins.

489 ἐμοὶ δ’ ὀπαδοὺς τούσδε καὶ δορυσσόους ἔταξαν, ὡς ἔχοιμι τίμιον γέρας, καὶ μὴ ’ξ ἀέλπτων δορικανεῖ μόρῳ θανὼν λάθοιμι, χώρᾳ δ’ ἄχθος ἀείζων πέλοι.
To me, they assigned these attendants and spearmen, so that I might have honorable distinction and not die unnoticed by the spear's blow, becoming an ever-growing burden to the land.

490 τοιῶνδε τυγχάνοντας ἐκ πρυμνῆς φρενὸς χάριν σέβεσθαι τιμιωτέραν χρεών.
Those who receive such favors must hold gratitude in higher honor from the depths of their hearts.

491 καὶ ταῦθ’ ἅμ’ ἐγγράψασθε πρὸς γεγραμμένοις πολλοῖσιν ἄλλοις σωφρονίσμασιν πατρός, ἀγνῶθ’ ὅμιλον ἐξελέγχεσθαι χρόνῳ.
And along with these, inscribe in your hearts many other wise teachings of your father, knowing that an unknown company is proven over time.

492 πᾶς δ’ ἐν μετοίκῳ γλῶσσαν εὔτυκον φέρει κακήν, τό τ’ εἰπεῖν εὐπετὲς μύσαγμά πως.
Every foreigner carries a tongue prone to evil, and it is easy to utter slander lightly.

493 ὑμᾶς δ’ ἐπαινῶ μὴ καταισχύνειν ἐμέ, ὥραν ἐχούσας τήνδ’ ἐπίστρεπτον βροτοῖς.
I commend you not to bring shame upon me, now that you have reached an age that attracts the gaze of men.

494 τέρειν’ ὀπώρα δ’ εὐφύλακτος οὐδαμῶς;
The tender ripeness of summer fruit is by no means easy to protect;

495 θῆρες δὲ κηραίνουσι καὶ βροτοί, τί μήν?
Beasts and men alike prey upon it, do they not?

496 καὶ κνώδαλα πτεροῦντα καὶ πεδοστιβῆ.
And creatures that fly and those that tread the earth.

497 καρπώματα στάζοντα κηρύσσει Κύπρις καλωρα κωλύουσαν θωσμένειν ἐρῶ, καὶ παρθένων χλιδαῖσιν εὐμόρφοις ἔπι πᾶς τις παρελθὼν ὄμματος θελκτήριον τόξευμ’ ἔπεμψεν, ἱμέρου νικώμενος.
Love's goddess heralds the dripping fruits, preventing them from being plucked by love, and everyone who passes by sends an alluring arrow from their eyes at the delicate beauty of virgins, overcome by desire.

498 πρὸς ταῦτα μὴ πάθωμεν ὧν πολὺς πόνος πολὺς δὲ πόντος οὕνεκ’ ἠρόθη δορί, μηδ’ αἶσχος ἡμῖν, ἡδονὴν δ’ ἐχθροῖς ἐμοῖς πράξωμεν.
Let us not suffer for that which has caused us much toil and much trouble over the sea, nor bring shame upon ourselves, nor grant pleasure to my enemies.

499 οἴκησις δὲ καὶ διπλῆ πάρα τὴν μὲν Πελασγός, τὴν δὲ καὶ πόλις διδοῖ, οἰκεῖν λάτρων ἄτερθεν.
We have been offered two kinds of dwelling, one by the Pelasgians and another by the city, to live without servitude.

500 εὐπετῆ τάδε.
These terms are easy.

501	μόνον φύλαξαι τάσδ’ ἐπιστολὰς πατρός , τὸ σωφρονεῖν τιμῶσα τοῦ βίου πλέον .
Only pay heed to these behests of your father, and count your chastity more precious than your life.

502	τ- ἄλλʼ εὐτυχοῖμεν πρὸς θεῶν Ὀλυμπίων.
May we be fortunate in all else, with the blessing of the Olympian gods.

503	ἐμῆς δ’ ὀπώρας οὕνεκ’ εὖ θάρσει, πάτερ.
Father, be of good cheer for the sake of my virginity.

504	εἰ γάρ τι μὴ θεοῖς βεβούλευται νέον, ἴχνος τὸ πρόσθεν οὐ διαστρέψω φρενός.
For if anything not destined by the gods, I will not turn from my former path.

505	ἴτε μὰν ἀστυάνακτας μάκαρας θεοὺς γανάοντες πολιούχους τε καὶ οἳ χεῦμ’ Ἐρασίνου περιναίουσιν παλαιόν.
Let us go, honoring the blessed gods, the city's guardians, and those who dwell around the ancient stream of Erasinus.

506	ὑποδέξασθε δ’ ὀπαδοὶ μέλος.
And you, attendants, receive the song.

507	αἶνος δὲ πόλιν τήνδε Πελασγῶν ἐχέτω, μηδ’ ἔτι Νείλου προχοὰς σέβωμεν ὕμνοις.
Praise be to this city of the Pelasgians, and let us no longer honor the streams of the Nile with our hymns.

508	ποταμοὺς δ’ οἳ διὰ χώρας θελεμὸν πῶμα χέουσιν πολύτεκνοι, λιπαροῖς χεύμασι γαίας τόδε μειλίσσοντες οὖδας.
But the rivers that flow through the land, bringing plentiful water, soothing its soil with their fertilizing streams.

509	ἐπίδοι δ’ Ἄρτεμις ἁγνὰ στόλον οἰκτιζομένα, μηδ’ ὑπ’ ἀνάγκας γάμος ἔλθοι Κυθερείας.
May pure Artemis look upon this band with compassion, and may no marriage come through Cytherea's compulsion.

510	στυγίων πέλοι τόδ’ ἆθλον.
May this challenge be detestable.

511	Κύπριδος δ’ οὐκ ἀμελεῖ θεσμὸς ὅδ’ εὔφρων δύναται γὰρ Διὸς ἄγχιστα σὺν Ἥρᾳ.
Yet this decree of Cypris is not disregarded with joy; she can exert power very close to that of Zeus along with Hera.

512	τίεται δ’ αἰολόμητις θεὸς ἔργοις ἐπὶ σεμνοῖς.
The goddess of varied wiles is held in honor for her solemn rites.

513	μετάκοινοι δὲ φίλᾷ ματρὶ πάρεισιν Πόθος ᾗ τ’ οὐδὲν ἄπαρνον τελέθει θέλκτορι Πειθοῖ.
And Desire and Persuasion, who make nothing impossible, are in the train of their beloved mother.

514	δέδοται δ’ Ἁρμονίᾳ μοῖρ’ Ἀφροδίτας ψεδυρᾷ τρίβῳ τ’ Ἐρώτων.
And to Harmonia has been given a share of Aphrodite, and to the whispering caresses of the Loves.

515	φυγάδεσσιν δ’ ἐπιπνοίας κακά τ’ ἄλγη πολέμους θ’ αἱματόεντας προφοβοῦμαι.
But for us fugitives, I fear the breath of evils, the pain of war, and bloody battles.

516	τί ποτ’ εὔπλοιαν ἔπραξαν ταχυπόμποισι διωγμοῖς;
How did our smooth sailing fare amid swift pursuits?

517	ὅ τί τοι μόρσιμόν ἐστιν, τὸ γένοιτ’ ἄν.
Whatever is destined will surely come to pass.

518	Διὸς οὐ παρβατός ἐστιν μεγάλα φρὴν ἀπέρατος.
Zeus' great and boundless mind cannot be transgressed.

519	μετὰ πολλῶν δὲ γάμων ἅδε τελευτὰ προτερᾶν πέλοι γυναικῶν.
After many marriages, the final end of earlier women might be pleasant.

520	ὁ μέγας Ζεὺς ἀπαλέξαι γάμον Αἰγυπτογενῆ μοι.
May mighty Zeus avert the marriage from the Egyptian-born for me.

521	τὸ μὲν ἂν βέλτατον εἴη.
That would indeed be best.

522	σὺ δὲ θέλγοις ἂν ἄθελκτον.
But you would charm the uncharming.

523	σὺ δέ γ’ οὐκ οἶσθα τὸ μέλλον.
And you do not know what the future holds.

524	τί δὲ μέλλω φρένα Δίαν καθορᾶν, ὄψιν ἄβυσσον;
Why should I attempt to perceive the unfathomable mind of Zeus?

525	μέτριον νῦν ἔπος εὔχου.
Now let your words be moderate in your prayer.

526	τίνα καιρόν με διδάσκεις;
What sense of proportion are you teaching me?

527	τὰ θεῶν μηδὲν ἀγάζειν.
Do not overstep in asking too much of the gods.

528	Ζεὺς ἄναξ ἀποστεροίη γάμον δυσάνορα δάιον, ὅσπερ Ἰὼ πημονᾶς ἐλύσατ’ εὖ χειρὶ παιωνίᾳ κατασχεθών, εὐμενῆ βίαν κτίσας.
May Lord Zeus avert from me a cruel and hateful marriage, just as he once mercifully freed Io from her afflictions, restraining them with his healing hand, creating benevolent force.

529	καὶ κράτος νέμοι γυναιξίν.
And may he grant power to women.

530	τὸ βέλτερον κακοῦ καὶ τὸ δίμοιρον αἰνῶ, καὶ δίκᾳ δίκας ἕπεσθαι, ξὺν εὐχαῖς ἐμαῖς, λυτηρίοις μαχαναῖς θεοῦ πάρα.
I praise that which is better than the bad and the double portion of the good. I pray that justice follows justice, in line with my prayers, through the god's liberating mechanisms.