1	πρῶτον μὲν εὐχῇ τῇδε πρεσβεύω θεῶν τὴν πρωτόμαντιν Γαῖαν ·
First, in this prayer of mine, I give the place of highest honor among the gods to the first prophet, Earth;

2	ἐκ δὲ τῆς Θέμιν , ἣ δὴ τὸ μητρὸς δευτέρα τόδ’ ἕζετο μαντεῖον , ὡς λόγος τις ·
and after her to Themis, for she was the second to take this oracular seat of her mother, as legend tells.

3	ἐν δὲ τῷ τρίτῳ λάχει , θελούσης , οὐδὲ πρὸς βίαν τινός , Τιτανὶς ἄλλη παῖς Χθονὸς καθέζετο , Φοίβη ·
And in the third allotment, with Themis’ consent and not by force, another Titan, child of Earth, Phoebe, took her seat here.

4	δίδωσι δ’ ἣ γενέθλιον δόσιν Φοίβῳ ·
She gave it as a birthday gift to Phoebus;

5	τὸ Φοίβης δ’ ὄνομ’ ἔχει παρώνυμον .
who has his name from Phoebe.

6	λιπὼν δὲ λίμνην Δηλίαν τε χοιράδα , κέλσας ἐπ’ ἀκτὰς ναυπόρους τὰς Παλλάδος , ἐς τήνδε γαῖαν ἦλθε Παρνησοῦ θ’ ἕδρας .
Leaving the lake[*]and ridge of Delos, he landed on Pallas’ ship-frequented shores, and came to this region and the dwelling places on Parnassus.

7	πέμπουσι δ’ αὐτὸν καὶ σεβίζουσιν μέγα κελευθοποιοὶ παῖδες Ἡφαίστου , χθόνα ἀνήμερον τιθέντες ἡμερωμένην .
The children of Hephaistos,[*]road-builders taming the wildness of the untamed land, escorted him with mighty reverence.

8	μολόντα δ’ αὐτὸν κάρτα τιμαλφεῖ λεώς , Δελφός τε χώρας τῆσδε πρυμνήτης ἄναξ .
And at his arrival, the people and Delphus, helmsman and lord of this land, made a great celebration for him.

9	τέχνης δέ νιν Ζεὺς ἔνθεον κτίσας φρένα ἵζει τέταρτον τοῖσδε μάντιν ἐν θρόνοις ·
Zeus inspired his heart with prophetic skill and established him as the fourth prophet on this throne;

10	Διὸς προφήτης δ’ ἐστὶ Λοξίας πατρός .
but Loxias is the spokesman of Zeus, his father.

11	τούτους ἐν εὐχαῖς φροιμιάζομαι θεούς .
These are the gods I place in the beginning of my prayer.

12	Παλλὰς προναία δ’ ἐν λόγοις πρεσβεύεται ·
And Pallas who stands before the temple[*] is honored in my words;

13	σέβω δὲ νύμφας , ἔνθα Κωρυκὶς πέτρα κοίλη , φίλορνις , δαιμόνων ἀναστροφή ·
and I worship the Nymphs where the Corycian[*]rock is hollow, the delight of birds and haunt of gods.

14	Βρόμιος ἔχει τὸν χῶρον , οὐδ’ ἀμνημονῶ , ἐξ οὗτε Βάκχαις ἐστρατήγησεν θεός , λαγὼ δίκην Πενθεῖ καταρράψας μόρον ·
Bromius has held the region —I do not forget him— ever since he, as a god, led the Bacchantes in war, and contrived for Pentheus death as of a hunted hare.

15	Πλειστοῦ τε πηγὰς καὶ Ποσειδῶνος κράτος καλοῦσα καὶ τέλειον ὕψιστον Δία , ἔπειτα μάντις ἐς θρόνους καθιζάνω .
I call on the streams of Pleistus and the strength of Poseidon, and highest Zeus, the Fulfiller; and then I take my seat as prophetess upon my throne.

16	καὶ νῦν τυχεῖν με τῶν πρὶν εὐσόδων μακρῷ ἄριστα δοῖεν ·
And may they allow me now to have the best fortune, far better than on my previous entrances.

17	κ- εἰ παρ’ Ἑλλήνων τινές , ἴτων πάλῳ λαχόντες , ὡς νομίζεται .
And if there are any from among the Hellenes here, let them enter, in turn, by lot, as is the custom.

18	μαντεύομαι γὰρ ὡς ἂν ἡγῆται θεός .
For I prophesy as the god leads.

19	ἦ δεινὰ λέξαι , δεινὰ δ’ ὀφθαλμοῖς δρακεῖν , πάλιν μ’ ἔπεμψεν ἐκ δόμων τῶν Λοξίου , ὡς μήτε σωκεῖν μήτε μ’ ἀκταίνειν βάσιν , τρέχω δὲ χερσίν , οὐ ποδωκείᾳ σκελῶν ·
Horrors to tell, horrors for my eyes to see, have sent me back from the house of Loxias, so that I have no strength and I cannot walk upright. I am running on hands and knees, with no quickness in my limbs.

20	δείσασα γὰρ γραῦς οὐδέν , ἀντίπαις μὲν οὖν .
For an old woman, overcome with fright, is nothing, or rather she is like a child.

21	ἐγὼ μὲν ἕρπω πρὸς πολυστεφῆ μυχόν ·
I was on my way to the inner shrine, decked with wreaths.

22	ὁρῶ δ’ ἐπ’ ὀμφαλῷ μὲν ἄνδρα θεομυσῆ ἕδραν ἔχοντα προστρόπαιον , αἵματι στάζοντα χεῖρας καὶ νεοσπαδὲς ξίφος ἔχοντ’ ἐλαίας θ’ ὑψιγέννητον κλάδον , λήνει μεγίστῳ σωφρόνως ἐστεμμένον , ἀργῆτι μαλλῷ ·
I saw on the center-stone a man defiled in the eyes of the gods, occupying the seat of suppliants. His hands were dripping blood; he held a sword just drawn and an olive-branch, from the top of the tree, decorously crowned with a large tuft of wool.

23	τῇδε γὰρ τρανῶς

23	τῇδε γὰρ τρανῶς ἐρῶ .
For as to this I can speak clearly.

24	πρόσθεν δὲ τ- ἀνδρὸς τοῦδε θαυμαστὸς λόχος εὕδει γυναικῶν ἐν θρόνοισιν ἥμενος .
Before this man an extraordinary band of women slept, seated on thrones.

25	οὔτοι γυναῖκας , ἀλλὰ Γοργόνας λέγω , οὐδ’ αὖτε Γοργείοισιν εἰκάσω τύποις .
No! Not women, but rather Gorgons I call them; and yet I cannot compare them to forms of Gorgons either.

26	εἶδόν ποτ’ ἤδη Φινέως γεγραμμένας δεῖπνον φερούσας ·
Once before I saw some creatures in a painting, carrying off the feast of Phineus.

27	ἄπτεροί γε μὴν ἰδεῖν αὗται , μέλαιναι δ’ ἐς τὸ πᾶν βδελύκτροποι ·
But these are wingless in appearance, black, altogether disgusting.

28	ῥέγκουσι δ’ οὐ πλατοῖσι φυσιάμασιν ·
They snore with repulsive breaths.

29	ἐκ δ’ ὀμμάτων λείβουσι δυσφιλῆ λίβα ·
They drip from their eyes hateful drops.

30	καὶ κόσμος οὔτε πρὸς θεῶν ἀγάλματα φέρειν δίκαιος οὔτ’ ἐς ἀνθρώπων στέγας .
Their attire is not fit to bring either before the statues of the gods or into the homes of men.

31	τὸ φῦλον οὐκ ὄπωπα τῆσδ’ ὁμιλίας οὐδ’ ἥτις αἶα τοῦτ’ ἐπεύχεται γένος τρέφουσ’ ἀνατεὶ μὴ μεταστένειν πόνον .
I have never seen the tribe that produced this company, nor the land that boasts of rearing this brood with impunity and does not grieve for its labor afterwards.

32	τ- ἐντεῦθεν ἤδη τῶνδε δεσπότῃ δόμων αὐτῷ μελέσθω Λοξίᾳ μεγασθενεῖ .
Let what is to come now be the concern of the master of this house, powerful Loxias himself.

33	ἰατρόμαντις δ’ ἐστὶ καὶ τερασκόπος καὶ τοῖσιν ἄλλοις δωμάτων καθάρσιος .
He is a prophet of healing, a reader of portents, and for others a purifier of homes.

34	οὔτοι προδώσω ·
I will not betray you.

35	διὰ τέλους δέ σοι φύλαξ ἐγγὺς παρεστὼς καὶ πρόσω δ’ ἀποστατῶν ἐχθροῖσι τοῖς σοῖς οὐ γενήσομαι πέπων .
I will stand guard over you to the end, close at hand or keeping my distance, I will not be kind to your enemies.

36	καὶ νῦν ἁλούσας τάσδε τὰς μάργους ὁρᾷς ·
And now you see these maddened women overcome.

37	ὕπνῳ πεσοῦσαι δ’ αἱ κατάπτυστοι κόραι , γραῖαι παλαιαὶ παῖδες , αἷς οὐ μείγνυται θεῶν τις οὐδ’ ἄνθρωπος οὐδὲ θήρ ποτε .
These loathsome maidens have fallen asleep: old, ancient children, whom neither gods nor men nor beasts ever mingle with.

38	κακῶν δ’ ἕκατι κ- ἐγένοντʼ , ἐπεὶ κακὸν σκότον νέμονται Τάρταρόν θ’ ὑπὸ χθονός , μισήματ’ ἀνδρῶν καὶ θεῶν Ὀλυμπίων .
They were born for evil, living in the evil darkness of Tartarus under the earth, hateful to men and to the Olympian gods.

39	ὅμως δὲ φεῦγε μηδὲ μαλθακὸς γένῃ .
But still, flee and do not become cowardly.

40	ἐλῶσι γάρ σε καὶ δι’ ἠπείρου μακρᾶς βιβῶντ’ ἀν’ αἰεὶ τὴν πλανοστιβῆ χθόνα ὑπέρ τε πόντον καὶ περιρρύτας πόλεις .
They will chase you, continually driving you over the ever-wandering earth, across the wide continent, over the sea, and around island cities.

41	καὶ μὴ πρόκαμνε τόνδε βουκολούμενος πόνον ·
Do not grow weary while enduring this labor.

42	μολὼν δὲ Παλλάδος ποτὶ πτόλιν ἵζου παλαιὸν ἄγκαθεν λαβὼν βρέτας .
And when you reach the city of Pallas, sit down, taking hold of her ancient statue.

43	κ- ἐκεῖ δικαστὰς τῶνδε καὶ θελκτηρίους μύθους ἔχοντες μηχανὰς εὑρήσομεν , ὥστ’ ἐς τὸ πᾶν σε τῶνδ’ ἀπαλλάξαι πόνων ·
And there, we shall find judges and persuasive speeches as a means to free you entirely from these labors.

44	καὶ γὰρ κτανεῖν σ’ ἔπεισα μητρῷον δέμας .
For I persuaded you to kill your mother.

45	ἄναξ Ἄπολλον , οἶσθα μὲν τὸ μὴ ’δικεῖν ·
Lord Apollo, you know how to do no wrong;

46	ἐπεὶ δ’ ἐπίστᾳ , καὶ τὸ μὴ ’μελεῖν μάθε .
and, since you know this, learn not to be neglectful also.

47	σθένος δὲ ποιεῖν εὖ φερέγγυον τὸ σόν .
For your power to do good is assured.

48	μέμνησο , μὴ φόβος σε νικάτω φρένας .
Remember, do not let fear overpower your heart.

49	σὺ δ’ , αὐτάδελφον αἷμα καὶ κοινοῦ πατρός , Ἑρμῆ , φύλασσε ·
You, Hermes, my blood brother, born of the same father, watch over him;

50	κάρτα δ’ ὢν ἐπώνυμος πομπαῖος ἴσθι , τόνδε ποιμαίνων ἐμὸν ἱκέτην — σέβει τοι Ζεὺς τόδ’ ἐκνόμων σέβας — ὁρμώμενον βροτοῖσιν εὐπόμπῳ τύχῃ .
true to your name, be his guide, shepherding this suppliant of mine—truly Zeus respects this right of outlaws—as he is sped on towards mortals with the fortune of a good escort.

51	εὕδοιτ’ ἄν , ὠή , καὶ καθευδουσῶν τί δεῖ ;
Sleep on! Aha! Yet what need is there of sleepers?

52	ἐγὼ δ’ ὑφ’ ὑμῶν ὧδ’ ἀπητιμασμένη ἄλλοισιν ἐν νεκροῖσιν , ὧν μὲν ἔκτανον ὄνειδος ἐν φθιτοῖσιν οὐκ ἐκλείπεται , αἰσχρῶς δ’ ἀλῶμαι ·
It is due to you that I am thus dishonored among the other dead; because of those I killed the dead never cease to reproach me, and I wander in disgrace.

53	προυννέπω δ’ ὑμῖν ὅτι ἔχω μεγίστην αἰτίαν κείνων ὕπο ·
I tell you that I am most greatly accused by them.

54	παθοῦσα δ’ οὕτω δεινὰ πρὸς τῶν φιλτάτων , οὐδεὶς ὑπέρ μου δαιμόνων μηνίεται , κατασφαγείσης πρὸς χερῶν μητροκτόνων .
And yet, although I have suffered cruelly in this way from my nearest kin, no divine power is angry on my behalf, slaughtered as I have been by the hands of a matricide.

55	ὁρᾶτε πληγὰς τάσδε καρδίας ὅθεν .
See these g

ashes in my heart, and from where they came!

56	εὕδουσα γὰρ φρὴν ὄμμασιν λαμπρύνεται , ἐν ἡμέρᾳ δὲ μοῖρ’ ἀπρόσκοπος βροτῶν .
For the sleeping mind has clear vision, but in the daytime the fate of mortals is unforeseeable.

57	ἦ πολλὰ μὲν δὴ τῶν ἐμῶν ἐλείξατε , χοάς τ’ ἀοίνους , νηφάλια μειλίγματα , καὶ νυκτίσεμνα δεῖπν’ ἐπ’ ἐσχάρᾳ πυρὸς ἔθυον , ὥραν οὐδενὸς κοινὴν θεῶν .
Truly, you have lapped up many of my offerings—wineless libations, a sober appeasement; and I have sacrificed banquets in the solemn night upon a hearth of fire at an hour unshared by any god.

58	καὶ πάντα ταῦτα λὰξ ὁρῶ πατούμενα .
I see all this trampled under foot.

59	ὁ δ’ ἐξαλύξας οἴχεται νεβροῦ δίκην , καὶ ταῦτα κούφως ἐκ μέσων ἀρκυστάτων ὤρουσεν ὑμῖν ἐγκατιλλώψας μέγα .
But he has escaped and is gone, like a fawn; lightly indeed, from the middle of snares, he has rushed away mocking at you.

60	ἀκούσαθ’ ὡς ἔλεξα τῆς ἐμῆς περὶ ψυχῆς , φρονήσατ’ , ὦ κατὰ χθονὸς θεαί .
Hear me, since I plead for my life, awake to consciousness, goddesses of the underworld!

61	ὄναρ γὰρ ὑμᾶς νῦν Κλυταιμήστρα καλῶ .
For in a dream I, Clytaemestra, now invoke you.

63	μύζοιτ’ ἄν , ἁνὴρ δ’ οἴχεται φεύγων πρόσω ·
Whine, if you will! But the man is gone, fled far away.

64	φίλοι γάρ εἰσιν οὐκ ἐμοῖς προσεικότες .
For he has friends that are not like mine!

65	μυγμός .
(whine)

66	ἄγαν ὑπνώσσεις κ- οὐ κατοικτίζεις πάθος ·
You are too drowsy and do not pity my suffering.

67	φονεὺς δ’ Ὀρέστης τῆσδε μητρὸς οἴχεται .
Orestes, the murderer of me, his mother, is gone!

68	ὡ’γμός .
(moan)

69	ᾤζεις , ὑπνώσσεις ·
You moan, you drowse—

70	οὐκ ἀναστήσῃ τάχος ;
will you not get up at once?

71	τί σοι πέπρωται πρᾶγμα πλὴν τεύχειν κακά ;
Is it your destiny to do anything other than cause harm?

72	ὡ’γμός .
(moan)

73	ὕπνος πόνος τε κύριοι συνωμόται δεινῆς δρακαίνης ἐξεκήραναν μένος .
Sleep and toil, effective conspirators, have destroyed the force of the dreadful dragoness.

74	μυγμὸς διπλοῦς ὀξύς .
(sharp double whine)

75	λαβὲ λαβὲ λαβὲ λαβέ , φράζου .
Catch him! Catch him! Catch him! Catch him! Look sharp!

76	ὄναρ διώκεις θῆρα , κλαγγαίνεις δ’ ἅπερ κύων μέριμναν οὔποτ’ ἐκλείπων πόνου .
You pursue a dream-beast and make a noise just as a dog does, never abandoning your eager effort.

77	τί δρᾷς ;
What are you doing?

78	ἀνίστω , μή σε νικάτω πόνος , μηδ’ ἀγνοήσῃς πῆμα μαλθαχθεῖσ’ ὕπνῳ .
Get up; do not let fatigue conquer you, and do not ignore your suffering, having been made soft by sleep.

79	ἄλγησον ἧπαρ ἐνδίκοις ὀνείδεσιν ·
Cause your heart to grieve with just reproaches;

80	τοῖς σώφροσιν γὰρ ἀντίκεντρα γίγνεται .
For to the self-disciplined, reproach becomes a spur.

81	σὺ δ’ αἱματηρὸν πνεῦμ’ ἐπουρίσασα τῷ , ἀτμῷ κατισχναίνουσα , νηδύος πυρί , ἕπου , μάραινε δευτέροις διώγμασιν .
But you, having infused a bloody breath into him, weakening him with the vapor of your fiery guts, follow, wither him with further pursuits.

82	ἔγειρ’ , ἔγειρε καὶ σὺ τήνδ’ , ἐγὼ δὲ σέ .
Awake, wake up her, and I you.

83	εὕδεις ;
Are you sleeping?

84	ἀνίστω , κ- ἀπολακτίσασʼ ὕπνον , ἰδώμεθ’ εἴ τι τοῦδε φροιμίου ματᾷ .
Get up, having shaken off sleep, let's see if any of this effort is in vain.

85	ἰοὺ ἰοὺ πύπαξ .
Oh, oh! Alas! 

86	ἐπάθομεν, φίλαι, — ἦ πολλὰ δὴ παθοῦσα καὶ μάτην ἐγώ, — ἐπάθομεν πάθος δυσαχές, ὦ πόποι, ἄφερτον κακόν ·
We have suffered, friends. Indeed I have suffered much and all in vain. We have suffered very painfully, oh! an unbearable evil.

87	ἐξ ἀρκύων πέπτωκεν οἴχεταί θ’ ὁ θήρ.
The beast has escaped from our nets and is gone.

88	— ὕπνῳ κρατηθεῖσ’ ἄγραν ὤλεσα.
Overcome by sleep, I have lost my prey.

89	ἰὼ παῖ Διός, ἐπίκλοπος πέλῃ, — νέος δὲ γραίας δαίμονας καθιππάσω, — τὸν ἱκέταν σέβων, ἄθεον ἄνδρα καὶ τοκεῦσιν πικρόν ·
Oh! Child of Zeus, you have become a thief— you, a youth, have ridden down old divinities—by showing respect to your suppliant, a godless man and cruel to a parent;

90	τὸν μητραλοίαν δ’ ἐξέκλεψας ὢν θεός.
although you are a god, you have stolen away a man that killed his mother.

91	— τί τῶνδ’ ἐρεῖ τις δικαίως ἔχειν;
What is there here that anyone shall call just?

92	ἐμοὶ δ’ ὄνειδος ἐξ ὀνειράτων μολὸν ἔτυψεν δίκαν διφρηλάτου μεσολαβεῖ κέντρῳ ὑπὸ φρένας, ὑπὸ λοβόν.
Reproach, coming to me in a dream, struck me like a charioteer with goad held tight, under my heart, under my vitals.

93	— πάρεστι μαστίκτορος δαΐου δαμίου βαρὺ τὸ περίβαρυ κρύος ἔχειν.
I can feel the cruel, the very cruel chill of the executioner’s destroying scourge.

94	τοιαῦτα δρῶσιν οἱ νεώτεροι θεοί, κρατοῦντες τὸ πᾶν δίκας πλ

έον φονολιβῆ θρόνον περὶ πόδα, περὶ κάρα.
They do such things, the younger gods, who rule, wholly beyond justice, a throne dripping blood, about its foot, about its head.

95	— πάρεστι γᾶς ὀμφαλὸν προσδρακεῖν αἱμάτων βλοσυρὸν ἀρόμενον ἄγος ἔχειν.
I can see the center-stone of the earth defiled with a terrible pollution of blood.

96	ἐφεστίῳ δὲ μάντις ὢν μιάσματι μυχὸν ἐχράνατ’ αὐτόσσυτος, αὐτόκλητος, παρὰ νόμον θεῶν βρότεα μὲν τίων, παλαιγενεῖς δὲ μοίρας φθίσας.
Although he is a prophet, he has stained his sanctuary with pollution at its hearth, at his own urging, at his own bidding; against the law of the gods, he has honored mortal things and caused the ancient allotments to decay.

97	κ- ἐμοί γε λυπρός, καὶ τὸν οὐκ ἐκλύσεται, ὑπό τε γᾶν φυγὼν οὔ ποτ’ ἐλευθεροῦται.
And he brings distress to me too, but he shall not win his release; even if he escapes beneath the earth, he is never set free.

98	ποτιτρόπαιος ὢν δ’ ἕτερον ἐν κάρᾳ μιάστορ’ ἐκ γένους πάσεται.
A suppliant, he will acquire another avenger from his family.

99	ἔξω, κελεύω, τῶνδε δωμάτων τάχος χωρεῖτ’, ἀπαλλάσσεσθε μαντικῶν μυχῶν, μὴ καὶ λαβοῦσα πτηνὸν ἀργηστὴν ὄφιν, χρυσηλάτου θώμιγγος ἐξορμώμενον, ἀνῇς ὑπ’ ἄλγους μέλαν’ ἀπ’ ἀνθρώπων ἀφρόν, ἐμοῦσα θρόμβους οὓς ἀφείλκυσας φόνου.
Out, I order you! Go away from this house at once, leave my prophetic sanctuary, so that you may not be struck by a winged glistening snake[*] shot forth from a golden bow-string, and painfully release black foam, vomiting the clots of blood you have drained from mortals.

100	οὔτοι δόμοισι τοῖσδε χρίμπτεσθαι πρέπει ·
It is not right for you to approach this house;

101	ἀλλ’ οὗ καρανιστῆρες ὀφθαλμωρύχοι δίκαι σφαγαί τε σπέρματός τ’ ἀποφθορᾷ παίδων κακοῦται χλοῦνις, ἠδ’ ἀκρωνία, λευσμός τε, καὶ μύζουσιν οἰκτισμὸν πολὺν ὑπὸ ῥάχιν παγέντες.
no, your place is where the punishments are beheading, gouging out of eyes, cutting of throats, and where young men’s virility is ruined by destruction of seed; where there is mutilation and stoning, and where those who are impaled beneath their spine moan long and piteously.

102	ἆρ’ ἀκούετε οἵας ἑορτῆς ἔστ’ ἀπόπτυστοι θεοῖς στέργηθρ’ ἔχουσαι;
Do you hear what sort of feast is your delight? You are detested by the gods for it.

103	πᾶς δ’ ὑφηγεῖται τρόπος μορφῆς.
The whole fashion of your form sets it forth.

104	λέοντος ἄντρον αἱματορρόφου οἰκεῖν τοιαύτας εἰκός, οὐ χρηστηρίοις ἐν τοῖσδε πλησίοισι τρίβεσθαι μύσος.
Creatures like

you should live in the den of a blood-drinking lion, and not inflict pollution on all near you in this oracular shrine.

105	χωρεῖτ’ ἄνευ βοτῆρος αἰπολούμεναι.
Be gone, you goats without a herdsman!

106	ποίμνης τοιαύτης δ’ οὔτις εὐφιλὴς θεῶν.
No god loves such a flock.

107	ἄναξ Ἄπολλον, ἀντάκουσον ἐν μέρει.
Chorus Lord Apollo, hear our reply in turn.

108	αὐτὸς σὺ τούτων οὐ μεταίτιος πέλῃ, ἀλλ’ εἷς τὸ πᾶν ἔπραξας ὢν παναίτιος.
You yourself are not partially guilty of this deed; you alone have done it all, and are wholly guilty.

109	πῶς δή;
Apollo What do you mean? Draw out the length of your speech this much.

110	τοσοῦτο μῆκος ἔκτεινον λόγου.
Through your oracle, you directed the stranger to kill his mother.

111	ἔχρησας ὥστε τὸν ξένον μητροκτονεῖν.
Apollo Through my oracle, I directed him to exact vengeance for his father. What of it?

112	ἔχρησα ποινὰς τοῦ πατρὸς πρᾶξαι.
Chorus And then you agreed to take the fresh blood on yourself.

113	τί μήν;
Apollo And I ordered him to turn for expiation to this house.

114	κ- ἔπειθ’ ὑπέστης αἵματος δέκτωρ νέου.
Chorus And do you then rebuke us, the ones who escorted him here?

115	καὶ προστραπέσθαι τούσδ’ ἐπέστελλον δόμους.
Apollo Yes, for you are not fit to approach this house.

116	καὶ τὰς προπομποὺς δῆτα τάσδε λοιδορεῖς;
Chorus But this has been assigned to us—

117	οὐ γὰρ δόμοισι τοῖσδε πρόσφορον μολεῖν.
Apollo What is this office of yours? Boast of your fine privilege!

118	ἀλλ’ ἔστιν ἡμῖν τοῦτο προστεταγμένον.
Chorus We drive matricides from their homes.

119	τίς ἥδε τιμή;
Apollo But what about a wife who kills her husband?

120	κόμπασον γέρας καλόν.
Chorus That would not be murder of a relative by blood.

124	ἦ κάρτ’ ἄτιμα καὶ παρ’ οὐδὲν εἰργάσω Ἥρας τελείας καὶ Διὸς πιστώματα.
Then truly you dishonor and bring to nothing the pledges of Hera, the Fulfiller, and Zeus.

125	Κύπρις δ’ ἄτιμος τῷδ’ ἀπέρριπται λόγῳ, ὅθεν βροτοῖσι γίγνεται τὰ φίλτατα.
Cypris too is cast aside, dishonored by this argument, and from her come the dearest things for mortals.

126	εὐνὴ γὰρ ἀνδρὶ καὶ γυναικὶ μόρσιμος ὅρκου ’στὶ μείζων τῇ δίκῃ φρουρουμένη.
For marriage ordained by fate for a man and a woman is greater than an oath and guarded by Justice.

127	εἰ τοῖσιν οὖν κτείνουσιν ἀλλήλους χαλᾷς τὸ μὴ τίνεσθαι μηδ’ ἐποπτεύειν κότῳ, οὔ φημ’ Ὀρέστην σ’ ἐνδίκως ἀνδρηλατεῖν.
If, then, one should kill the other and you are so lenient as not to punish or visit them with anger, I claim that you unjustly banish Orestes from his home.

128	τὰ μὲν γὰρ οἶδα κάρτα σ’ ἐνθυμουμένην, τὰ δ’ ἐμφανῶς πράσσουσαν ἡσυχαιτέραν.
For I see you taking the one cause very much to heart, but clearly acting more leniently about the other.

129	δίκας δὲ Παλλὰς τῶνδ’ ἐποπτεύσει θεά.
But the goddess Pallas will oversee the pleadings in this case.

130	τὸν ἄνδρ’ ἐκεῖνον οὔ τι μὴ λίπω ποτέ.
Chorus I will never, never leave that man!

131	σὺ δ’ οὖν δίωκε καὶ πόνον πλείω τίθου.
Apollo Pursue him then and get more trouble for yourself.

132	τιμὰς σὺ μὴ σύντεμνε τὰς ἐμὰς λόγῳ.
Chorus Do not cut short my privileges by your words.

133	οὐδ’ ἂν δεχοίμην ὥστ’ ἔχειν τιμὰς σέθεν.
Apollo I would not take your privileges as a gift.

134	μέγας γὰρ ἔμπας πὰρ Διὸς θρόνοις λέγῃ.
Chorus No, for in any case you are called great at the throne of Zeus.

135	ἐγὼ δ’, ἄγει γὰρ αἷμα μητρῷον, δίκας μέτειμι τόνδε φῶτα κ- ἐκκυνηγετῶ.
But as for me—since a mother’s blood leads me, I will pursue my case against this man and I will hunt him down.

136	ἐγὼ δ’ ἀρήξω τὸν ἱκέτην τε ῥύσομαι;
Apollo And I will aid my suppliant and rescue him!

137	δεινὴ γὰρ ἐν βροτοῖσι κ- ἐν θεοῖς πέλει τοῦ προστροπαίου μῆνις, εἰ προδῶ σφ’ ἑκών.
For the wrath of the one who seeks purification is terrible among mortals and gods, if I intentionally abandon him. 


138 ἄνασσ’ Ἀθάνα, Λοξίου κελεύμασιν ἥκω, δέχου δὲ πρευμενῶς ἀλάστορα, οὐ προστρόπαιον οὐδ’ ἀφοίβαντον χέρα, ἀλλ’ ἀμβλὺς ἤδη προστετριμμένος τε πρὸς ἄλλοισιν οἴκοις καὶ πορεύμασιν βροτῶν.
Lady Athena, at Loxias’ command I have come. Receive kindly an accursed wretch, not one who seeks purification, or with unclean hand, but with my guilt’s edge already blunted and worn away at other homes and in the travelled paths of men.

139 ὅμοια χέρσον καὶ θάλασσαν ἐκπερῶν, σῴζων ἐφετμὰς Λοξίου χρηστηρίους, πρόσειμι δῶμα καὶ βρέτας τὸ σόν, θεά.
Going over land and sea alike, keeping the commands of Loxias’ oracle, I now approach your house and image, goddess.

140 αὐτοῦ φυλάσσων ἀναμένω τέλος δίκης.
Here I will keep watch and await the result of my trial.

141 εἶεν ·
Aha! 

142 τόδ’ ἐστὶ τ- ἀνδρὸς ἐκφανὲς τέκμαρ.
This is a clear sign of the man.

143 ἕπου δὲ μηνυτῆρος ἀφθέγκτου φραδαῖς.
Follow the hints of a voiceless informer.

144 τετραυματισμένον γὰρ ὡς κύων νεβρὸν πρὸς αἷμα καὶ σταλαγμὸν ἐκματεύομεν.
For as a hound tracks a wounded fawn, so we track him by the drops of blood.

145 πολλοῖς δὲ μόχθοις ἀνδροκμῆσι φυσιᾷ σπλάγχνον ·
My lungs pant from many tiring struggles, for I have roamed over the whole earth, οὐδὲν ὑστέρα νεώς.

146 χθονὸς γὰρ πᾶς πεποίμανται τόπος, ὑπέρ τε πόντον ἀπτέροις ποτήμασιν ἦλθον διώκουσ’,
and I have come over the sea in wingless flight, pursuing him, no slower than a ship.





147 καὶ νῦν ὅδ’ ἐνθάδ’ ἐστί που καταπτακών.
And now he is here somewhere, cowering. 

148	ὀσμὴ βροτείων αἱμάτων με προσγελᾷ .
The smell of human blood gives me a smiling welcome.

149	ὅρα ὅρα μάλ’ αὖ, λεύσσετε πάντα, μὴ λάθῃ φύγδα βὰς ὁ ματροφόνος ἀτίτας.
Look everywhere, so that the matricide will not escape by secret flight, with his debt unpaid!

150	ὁ δ’ αὖτέ γ’ οὖν ἀλκὰν ἔχων περὶ βρέτει πλεχθεὶς θεᾶς ἀμβρότου ὑπόδικος θέλει γενέσθαι χρεῶν.
Yes, here he is again with a defense; his arms twisted around the image of the immortal goddess, he wishes to be tried for his debt.

151	τὸ δ’ οὐ πάρεστιν;
But that is not possible;

152	αἷμα μητρῷον χαμαὶ δυσαγκόμιστον, παπαῖ, τὸ διερὸν πέδοι χύμενον οἴχεται.
a mother’s blood upon the earth is hard to recover—alas, the liquid poured on the ground is gone.

153	ἀλλ’ ἀντιδοῦναι δεῖ σ’ ἀπὸ ζῶντος ῥοφεῖν ἐρυθρὸν ἐκ μελέων πέλανον;
But you must allow me in return to suck the red blood from your living limbs.

154	ἀπὸ δὲ σοῦ φεροίμαν βοσκὰν πώματος δυσπότου;
May I feed on you—a gruesome drink!

155	καὶ ζῶντά σ’ ἰσχνάνασ’ ἀπάξομαι κάτω, ἀντίποιν’ ὡς τίνῃς ματροφόνου δύας.
I will wither you alive and drag you down, so that you pay atonement for your murdered mother’s agony.

156	ὄψει δὲ κ- εἴ τις ἄλλος ἤλιτεν βροτῶν ἢ θεὸν ἢ ξένον τιν’ ἀσεβῶν ἢ τοκέας φίλους, ἔχονθ’ ἕκαστον τῆς δίκης ἐπάξια.
And you will see any other mortal who has sinned by not honoring a god or a stranger or dear parents, each having a just punishment.

157	μέγας γὰρ Ἅιδης ἐστὶν εὔθυνος βροτῶν ἔνερθε χθονός, δελτογράφῳ δὲ πάντ’ ἐπωπᾷ φρενί.
For Hades is mighty in holding mortals to account under the earth, and he observes all things and within his mind inscribes them.

158	ἐγὼ διδαχθεὶς ἐν κακοῖς ἐπίσταμαι πολλοὺς καθαρμούς, καὶ λέγειν

ὅπου δίκη σιγᾶν θ’ ὁμοίως;
Taught by misery, I know many purification rituals, and I know where it is right to speak and equally to be silent;

159	ἐν δὲ τῷδε πράγματι φωνεῖν ἐτάχθην πρὸς σοφοῦ διδασκάλου.
and in this case, I have been ordered to speak by a wise teacher.

160	βρίζει γὰρ αἷμα καὶ μαραίνεται χερός, μητροκτόνον μίασμα δ’ ἔκπλυτον πέλει;
For the blood is slumbering and fading from my hand, the pollution of matricide is washed away;

161	ποταίνιον γὰρ

ὂν πρὸς ἑστίᾳ θεοῦ Φοίβου καθαρμοῖς ἠλάθη χοιροκτόνοις.
while it was still fresh, it was driven away at the hearth of the god Phoebus by purifying sacrifices of swine.

162	πολὺς δέ μοι γένοιτ’ ἂν ἐξ ἀρχῆς λόγος, ὅσοις προσῆλθον ἀβλαβεῖ ξυνουσίᾳ.
It would be a long story to tell from the beginning, how many people I have visited, with no harm from association with me.

163	χρόνος καθαιρεῖ πάντα γηράσκων ὁμοῦ.
Time purges all things, aging with them.


164	καὶ νῦν ἀφ’ ἁγνοῦ στόματος εὐφήμως καλῶ χώρας ἄνασσαν τῆσδ’ Ἀθηναίαν ἐμοὶ μολεῖν ἀρωγόν ·
So now with a pure mouth I piously invoke Athena, lady of this land, to come to my aid.

165	κτήσεται δ’ ἄνευ δορὸς αὐτόν τε καὶ γῆν καὶ τὸν Ἀργεῖον λεὼν πιστὸν δικαίως ἐς τὸ πᾶν τε σύμμαχον .
Without the spear, she will win me and my land and the Argive people as faithful and true allies for all time.

166	ἀλλ’ εἴτε χώρας ἐν τόποις Λιβυστικοῖς , Τρίτωνος ἀμφὶ χεῦμα γενεθλίου πόρου , τίθησιν ὀρθὸν ἢ κατηρεφῆ πόδα , φίλοις ἀρήγουσ’ , εἴτε Φλεγραίαν πλάκα θρασὺς ταγοῦχος ὡς ἀνὴρ ἐπισκοπεῖ , ἔλθοι — κλύει δὲ καὶ πρόσωθεν ὢν θεός — ὅπως γένοιτο τῶνδ’ ἐμοὶ λυτήριος .
But whether in some region of the Libyan land, near the waters of Triton, her native stream, she is in action or at rest, aiding those whom she loves, or whether, like a bold marshal, she is surveying the Phlegraean plain, oh, let her come—as a goddess, she hears even from far away—to be my deliverer from distress!

167	οὔτοι σ’ Ἀπόλλων οὐδ’ Ἀθηναίας σθένος ῥύσαιτ’ ἂν ὥστε μὴ οὐ παρημελημένον ἔρρειν , τὸ χαίρειν μὴ μαθόνθ’ ὅπου φρενῶν , ἀναίματον βόσκημα δαιμόνων , σκιάν .
No, neither Apollo nor Athena’s strength can save you from perishing abandoned, not knowing where joy is in your heart—a bloodless victim of the gods below, a shadow.

168	οὐδ’ ἀντιφωνεῖς , ἀλλ’ ἀποπτύεις λόγους , ἐμοὶ τραφείς τε καὶ καθιερωμένος ;
You do not answer, but scorn my words, you who are fattened and consecrated to me?

169	καὶ ζῶν με δαίσεις οὐδὲ πρὸς βωμῷ σφαγείς ·
Living,

you will be my feast, not slain at an altar; 

170	ὕμνον δ’ ἀκούσῃ τόνδε δέσμιον σέθεν .
now you will hear this hymn, a spell to bind you.

171	ἄγε δὴ καὶ χορὸν ἅψωμεν , ἐπεὶ μοῦσαν στυγερὰν ἀποφαίνεσθαι δεδόκηκεν , λέξαι τε λάχη τὰ κατ’ ἀνθρώπους ὡς ἐπινωμᾷ στάσις ἁμά .
Come now, let us also join the dance, since we are resolved to display our hated song and to declare our allotted office, how our party directs the affairs of men.

172	εὐθυδίκαιοι δ’ οἰόμεθ’ εἶναι ·
We claim to be just and upright.

173	τὸν μὲν καθαρὰς χεῖρας προνέμοντ’ οὔτις ἐφέρπει μῆνις ἀφ’ ἡμῶν , ἀσινὴς δ’ αἰῶνα διοιχνεῖ ·
No wrath from us will come stealthily to the one who holds out clean hands, and he will go through life unharmed;

174	ὅστις δ’ ἀλιτὼν ὥσπερ ὅδ’ ἁνὴρ χεῖρας φονίας ἐπικρύπτει , μάρτυρες ὀρθαὶ τοῖσι θανοῦσιν παραγιγνόμεναι πράκτορες αἵματος αὐτῷ τελέως ἐφάνημεν .
but whoever sins, as this man has, and hides his blood-stained hands, as avengers of bloodshed we appear against him to the end, presenting ourselves as upright witnesses for the dead.

175	μᾶτερ ἅ μ’ ἔτικτες , ὦ μᾶτερ Νύξ , ἀλαοῖσι καὶ δεδορκόσιν ποινάν , κλῦθ’ .
O mother Night, hear me, mother who gave birth to me as a retribution for the blind and the seeing.

176	ὁ Λατοῦς γὰρ ἶνίς μ’ ἄτιμον τίθησιν τόνδ’ ἀφαιρούμενος πτῶκα , ματρῷον ἅγνισμα κύριον φόνου .
For Leto’s son dishonors me by snatching away this cowering wretch, a proper expiation for his mother’s blood.

177	ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ τεθυμέν

ῳ τόδε μέλος , παρακοπά , παραφορὰ φρενοδαλής , ὕμνος ἐξ Ἐρινύων , δέσμιος φρενῶν , ἀφόρμικτος , αὐονὰ βροτοῖς .
This is our song over the sacrificial victim—frenzied, maddened, destroying the mind, the Furies’ hymn, a spell to bind the soul, not tuned to the lyre, withering the life of mortals.


178	τοῦτο γὰρ λάχος διανταία Μοῖρ’ ἐπέκλωσεν ἐμπέδως ἔχειν , θνατῶν τοῖσιν αὐτουργίαι ξυμπέσωσιν μάταιοι , τοῖς ὁμαρτεῖν , ὄφρ’ ἂν γᾶν ὑπέλθῃ ·
For this is the lot that the unyielding Fates have spun for us to keep, to pursue vain deeds of mortals, those who are guilty, until they go beneath the earth.

179	θανὼν δ’ οὐκ ἄγαν ἐλεύθερος.
And after death, he is not entirely free.

180	ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ τεθυμένῳ τόδε μέλος, παρακοπά, παραφορὰ φρενοδαλής, ὕμνος ἐξ Ἐρινύων, δέσμιος φρενῶν, ἀφόρμικτος, αὐονὰ βροτοῖς.
This is our song over the sacrificial victim—frenzied, maddened, destroying the mind, the Furies' hymn, a spell to bind the soul, not tuned to the lyre, withering the life of mortals.

181	γιγνομέναισι λάχη τάδ’ ἐφ’ ἁμὶν ἐκράνθη.
This role was assigned to us at our birth.

182	ἀθανάτων δ’ ἀπέχειν χέρας, οὐδέ τις ἐστί συνδαίτωρ μετάκοινος.
We are kept away from the hands of the immortals, and none of them shares a feast with us.

183	παλλεύκων δὲ πέπλων ἀπόμοιρος ἄκληρος ἐτύχθην.
I have been allotted no share in the pure white ceremonial robes.

184	δωμάτων γὰρ εἱλόμαν ἀνατροπάς, ὅταν Ἄρης τιθασὸς ὢν φίλον ἕλῃ.
For I have chosen the overthrow of houses when Ares, being a household member, seizes someone near and dear.

185	ἐπὶ τὸν ὧδ’ ἱέμεναι κρατερὸν ὄνθ’ ὅμως ἀμαυροῦμεν ὑφ’ αἵματος νέου.
And chasing after such a man, strong though he is, we weaken him under the influence of fresh blood.



186	σπεύδομεν αἵδ’ ἀφελεῖν τινὰ τάσδε μερίμνας, θεῶν δ’ ἀτέλειαν ἐμαῖς μελέταις ἐπικραίνειν, μηδ’ εἰς ἄγκρισιν ἐλθεῖν.
We hasten to take these cares upon ourselves, intensifying the gods' exemption from our activities, so that it will not come to a trial.

187	Ζεὺς δ’ αἱμοσταγὲς ἀξιόμισον ἔθνος τόδε λέσχας ἇς ἀπηξιώσατο.
For Zeus has scorned us, a blood-dripping, loathsome tribe, as unworthy of his council.

188	δωμάτων γὰρ εἱλόμαν ἀνατροπάς, ὅταν Ἄρης τιθασὸς ὢν φίλον ἕλῃ.
For I have chosen the overthrow of houses when Ares, being a household member, seizes someone near and dear.

189	ἐπὶ τὸν ὧδ’ ἱέμεναι κρατερὸν ὄνθ’ ὅμως ἀμαυροῦμεν ὑφ’ αἵματος νέου.
Speeding after this man, we weaken him, even though he is strong, because of the fresh blood.

190	δόξαι τ’ ἀνδρῶν καὶ μάλ’ ὑπ’ αἰθέρι σεμναὶ τακόμεναι κατὰ γᾶν μινύθουσιν ἄτιμοι ἁμετέραις ἐφόδοις μελανείμοσιν, ὀρχησμοῖς τ’ ἐπιφθόνοις ποδός.
And men's thoughts and their dignified airs under the sky waste away and dwindle in dishonor beneath the earth, at our attack in black robes and the envious dance of our feet.

191	μάλα γὰρ οὖν ἁλομένα ἀνέκαθεν βαρυπεσῆ καταφέρω ποδὸς ἀκμάν, σφαλερὰ καὶ τανυδρόμοις κῶλα, δύσφορον ἄταν.
For surely with a great leap from above, I bring down the heavily falling force of my foot, tripping even swift runners with my limbs—unendurable ruin.

192	πίπτων δ’ οὐκ οἶδεν τόδ’ ὑπ’ ἄφρονι λύμᾳ.
But, as he falls, he does not know it, overwhelmed by his senseless folly.

193	τοῖον γὰρ ἐπὶ κνέφας ἀνδρὶ μύσος πεπόταται, καὶ δνοφεράν τιν’ ἀχλὺν κατὰ δώματος αὐδᾶται πολύστονος φάτις.
For such a darkness and a gloomy mist over a man is spoken of in a loud, mournful rumor in his house.

194	μάλα γὰρ οὖν ἁλομένα ἀνέκαθεν βαρυπεσῆ καταφέρω ποδὸς ἀκμάν, σφαλερὰ καὶ τανυδρόμοις κῶλα, δύσφορον ἄταν.
For surely with a great leap from above, I bring down the heavily falling force of my foot, tripping even swift runners with my limbs—unendurable ruin.

195	μένει γάρ.
For it remains.

196	εὐμήχανοί τε καὶ τέλειοι, κακῶν τε μνήμονες σεμναὶ καὶ δυσπαρήγοροι βροτοῖς, ἄτιμ’ ἀτίετα διόμεναι λάχη θεῶν διχοστατοῦντ’ ἀνηλίῳ λάμπᾳ, δυσοδοπαίπαλα δερκομένοισι καὶ δυσομμάτοις ὁμῶς.
We are skilled in devising and perfect in execution, remembered for evil deeds, solemn and hard for mortals to appease, bearing our dishonored lot, divided from the gods by the unshining light, making the path rough for both the sighted and the blind.

197	τίς οὖν τάδ’ οὐχ ἅζεταί τε καὶ δέδοικεν βροτῶν, ἐμοῦ κλύων θεσμὸν τὸν μοιρ

όκραντον ἐκ θεῶν δοθέντα τέλεον;
What mortal, then, would not shudder and be filled with dread upon hearing from me the law ordained by Fate, given by the gods as a perfect command?

198	ἔτι δέ μοι μένει γέρας παλαιόν, οὐδ’ ἀτιμίας κύρω, καίπερ ὑπὸ χθόνα τάξιν ἔχουσα καὶ δυσήλιον κνέφας.
And yet my ancient privilege remains, I am not bound by dishonor, even though I dwell beneath the earth and in sunless darkness.

199	πρόσωθεν ἐξήκουσα κληδόνος βοὴν ἀπὸ Σκαμάνδρου γῆν καταφθατουμένη, ἣν δῆτ’ Ἀχαιῶν ἄκτορές τε καὶ πρόμοι, τῶν αἰχμαλώτων χρημάτων λάχος μέγα, ἔνειμαν αὐτόπρεμνον εἰς τὸ πᾶν ἐμοί, ἐξαίρετον δώρημα Θησέως τόκοις.
From afar, I heard the call of a summons from Scamander's land as it was being laid waste. The leaders and chiefs of the Achaeans assigned to me a great portion of the spoils, wholly mine forever, a choice gift for Theseus' sons.

200	ἔνθεν διώκουσ’ ἦλθον ἄτρυτον πόδα, πτερῶν ἄτερ ῥοιβδοῦσα κόλπον αἰγίδος.
From there, I came, hastening on my tireless foot, rustling the fold of my aegis without wings.

201	πώλοις ἀκμαίοις τόνδ’ ἐπιζεύξασ’ ὄχον καινὴν δ’ ὁρῶσα τήνδ’ ὁμιλίαν χθονὸς ταρβῶ μὲν οὐδέν, θαῦμα δ’ ὄμμασιν πάρα.
Yoking this chariot to colts in their prime, I see this new gathering in my land. I am not afraid, but it is a wonder to my eyes.

202	τίνες ποτ’ ἐστέ;
Who are you?

203	πᾶσι δ’ ἐς κοινὸν λέγω.
I address this question to all of you.

204	βρέτας τε τ- ἐμὸν τῷδ’ ἐφημένῳ ξένῳ, ὑμᾶς θ’ ὁμοίας οὐδενὶ σπαρτῶν γένει, οὔτ’ ἐν θεαῖσι πρὸς θεῶν ὁρωμένας οὔτ’ οὖν βροτείοις ἐμφερεῖς μορφώμασιν.
You are seated at my statue, and you, who are like no race ever born, neither seen among goddesses by gods nor resembling mortal forms.

205	λέγειν δ’ ἄμομφον ὄντα τοὺς πέλας κακῶς πρόσω δικαίων ἠδ’ ἀποστατεῖ θέμις.
But to speak ill of one who is nearby and blameless is far from just, and it is against divine law.

206	πεύσῃ τὰ πάντα συντόμως, Διὸς κόρη.
You will hear everything briefly, daughter of Zeus.

207	ἡμεῖς γάρ ἐσμεν Νυκτὸς αἰανῆ τέκνα.
For we are the grim children of Night.

208	Ἀραὶ δ’ ἐν οἴκοις γῆς ὑπαὶ κεκλήμεθα.
We are called Curses in our homes beneath the earth.

209	γένος μὲν οἶδα κληδόνας τ’ ἐπωνύμους.
I know your family and the names you are called by.

210	τιμάς γε μὲν δὴ τὰς ἐμὰς πεύσῃ τάχα.
You will soon learn of my office.

211	μάθοιμ’ ἄν, εἰ λέγοι τις ἐμφανῆ λόγον.
I would understand if someone would tell the story clearly.

212	βροτοκτονοῦντας ἐκ δόμων ἐλαύνομεν.
We drive murderers from their homes.

213	καὶ τῷ κτανόντι ποῦ τὸ τέρμα τῆς φυγῆς;
And where is the end of flight for the killer?

214	ὅπου τὸ χαίρειν μηδαμοῦ νομίζεται.
Where joy is considered to be nowhere.

215	ἦ καὶ τοιαύτας τῷδ’ ἐπιρροιζεῖς φυγάς;
And would you drive this man to such a flight?

216	φονεὺς γὰρ εἶναι μητρὸς ἠξιώσατο.
Yes, for he chose to be his mother's murderer.

217	ἄλλαις ἀνάγκαις, ἤ τινος τρέων κότον;
Was it under other compulsion or in fear of someone's wrath?

218	ποῦ γὰρ τοσοῦτο κέντρον ὡς μητροκτονεῖν;
Where is there a spur so sharp as to justify the murder of a mother?

219	δυοῖν παρόντοιν ἥμισυς λόγου πάρα.
There are two parties present; only half the case has been heard.

220	ἀλλ’ ὅρκον οὐ δέξαιτ’ ἄν, οὐ δοῦναι θέλοι.
But he will not accept an oath, nor does he wish to give one.

221	κλύειν δίκαιος μᾶλλον ἢ πρᾶξαι θέλεις.
You prefer to be deemed just by hearing, rather than by doing justice.

222	πῶς δή;
How so?

223	δίδαξον;
Teach me.

224	τῶν σοφῶν γὰρ οὐ πένῃ.
For you are not lacking in wisdom.

225	ὅρκοις τὰ μὴ δίκαια μὴ νικᾶν λέγω.
I say that what is unjust should not triumph through oaths.

226	ἀλλ’ ἐξέλεγχε, κρῖνε δ’ εὐθεῖαν δίκην.
But examine the evidence, and make a straightforward judgment.

227	ἦ κ- ἄπʼ ἐμοὶ τρέποιτ’ ἂν αἰτίας τέλος;
Would you, then, entrust to me the resolution of this case?

228	πῶς δ’ οὔ;
Why not?

229	σέβουσαί γ’ ἀξίαν κ- ἄπʼ ἀξίων.
Respecting you as one who is worthy and from the worthy.

230	τί πρὸς τάδ’ εἰπεῖν, ὦ ξέν’, ἐν μέρει θέλεις;
What do you wish to say in response to this, stranger?

231	λέξας δὲ χώραν καὶ γένος καὶ ξυμφορὰς τὰς σάς, ἔπειτα τόνδ’ ἀμυναθοῦ ψόγον;
After naming your country and family and the misfortunes that are yours, then defend yourself against this charge.

232	εἴπερ πεποιθὼς τῇ δίκῃ βρέτας τόδε ἧσαι φυλάσσων ἑστίας ἁμῆς πέλας σεμνὸς προσίκτωρ ἐν τρόποις Ἰξίονος.
If indeed, trusting in the justice of your case, you sit guarding my hearth nearby, a solemn suppliant in the manner of Ixion.

233	τούτοις ἀμείβου πᾶσιν εὐμαθές τί μοι.
Respond to all these points clearly for me.

234	ἄνασσ’ Ἀθάνα, πρῶτον ἐκ τῶν ὑστάτων τῶν σῶν ἐπῶν μέλημ’ ἀφαιρήσω μέγα.
Lady Athena, first from your latest words, I will remove a great concern.

235	οὐκ εἰμὶ προστρόπαιος, οὐδ’ ἔχων μύσος πρὸς χειρὶ τ- ἐμῇ τὸ σὸν ἐφεζόμην βρέτας.
I am not a suppliant in need of purification, nor did I sit at your image with pollution on my hands.

236	τεκμήριον δὲ τῶνδέ σοι λέξω μέγα.
I will tell you a significant proof of this.

237	ἄφθογγον εἶναι τὸν παλαμναῖον νόμος, ἔστ’ ἂν πρὸς ἀνδρὸς αἵματος καθαρσίου σφαγαὶ καθαιμάξωσι νεοθήλου βοτοῦ.
The law of purification is to be speechless until the blood of a new-born victim purifies one from a man's blood.

238	πάλαι πρὸς ἄλλοις ταῦτ’ ἀφιερώμεθα οἴκοισι, καὶ βοτοῖσι καὶ ῥυτοῖς πόροις.
Long ago, I was purified in other houses by both victims and flowing streams.

239	ταύτην μὲν οὕτω φροντίδ’ ἐκποδὼν λέγω.
So, I say that this concern is out of the way.

240	γένος δὲ τ- ἐμὸν ὡς ἔχει πεύσῃ τάχα.
You will soon learn what my family is.

241	Ἀργεῖός εἰμι, πατέρα δ’ ἱστορεῖς καλῶς, Ἀγαμέμνον’, ἀνδρῶν ναυβατῶν ἁρμόστορα, ξὺν ᾧ σὺ Τροίαν ἄπολιν Ἰλίου πόλιν ἔθηκας.
I am an Argive; my father, whom you rightly ask about, was Agamemnon, commander of the seafaring men, with whom you made Troy, the city of Ilion, no longer a city.

242	ἔφθιθ’ οὗτος οὐ καλῶς, μολὼν εἰς οἶκον;
He met an unseemly end after returning home.

243	ἀλλά νιν κελαινόφρων ἐμὴ μήτηρ κατέκτα, ποικίλοις ἀγρεύμασιν κρύψασ’, ἃ λουτρῶν ἐξεμαρτύρει φόνον.
But my dark-hearted mother killed him, hiding him in crafty snares, the evidence of which the bath still bears witness to his murder.

244	κ- ἐγὼ κατελθών, τὸν πρὸ τοῦ φεύγων χρόνον, ἔκτεινα τὴν τεκοῦσαν, οὐκ ἀρνήσομαι, ἀντικτόνοις ποιναῖσι φιλτάτου πατρός.
And I, after returning, having been in exile before, killed the woman who bore me, I will not deny it, as retribution for the dearly beloved father.

245	καὶ τῶνδε κοινῇ Λοξίας ἐπαίτιος, ἄλγη προφωνῶν ἀντίκεντρα καρδίᾳ, εἰ μή τι τῶνδ’ ἔρξαιμι τοὺς ἐπαιτίους.
And for this deed, Loxias (Apollo) is jointly responsible, who, pronouncing pains as goads to my heart, threatened me if I did not perform these actions against those responsible.

246	σὺ δ’ εἰ δικαίως εἴτε μὴ κρῖνον δίκην;
Now, whether justly or not, you judge the case.

247	πράξας γὰρ ἐν σοὶ πανταχῇ τάδ’ αἰνέσω.
For having acted, I will praise your decision in every way.

248	τὸ πρᾶγμα μεῖζον, εἴ τις οἴεται τόδε βροτὸς δικάζειν;
This matter is too great, if any mortal thinks he can judge it.

249	οὐδὲ μὴν ἐμοὶ θέμις φόνου διαιρεῖν ὀξυμηνίτου δίκας.
Nor is it fitting for me to decide the justice of a case of murder that is followed by the swift anger of the Furies.

250	ἄλλως τε καὶ σὺ μὲν κατηρτυκὼς ἐμοῖς ἱκέτης προσῆλθες καθαρὸς ἀβλαβὴς δόμοις.
Moreover, you have come to my hearth as a suppliant, well-prepared, pure, and harmless to my house.

251	οὕτως δ’ ἄμομφον ὄντα σ’ αἰδοῦμαι πόλει.
Thus, being blameless, I respect you for the sake of my city.

252	αὗται δ’ ἔχουσι μοῖραν οὐκ εὐπέμπελον, καὶ μὴ τυχοῦσαι πράγματος νικηφόρου, χώρᾳ μεταῦθις ἰὸς ἐκ φρονημάτων πέδοι πεσὼν ἄφερτος αἰανὴς νόσος.
These women have a role that is not to be taken lightly, and if they do not achieve a successful outcome, a relentless and unbearable plague will fall upon the land from their resentment.

253	τοιαῦτα μὲν τάδ’ ἐστίν.
Such, then, is the situation.

254	ἀμφότερα, μένειν πέμπειν τε δυσπήμαντ’ ἀμηχάνως ἐμοί.
Both options, to keep them or to send them away, bring disaster and are perplexing to me.

255	ἐπεὶ δὲ πρᾶγμα δεῦρ’ ἐπέσκηψεν τόδε, φόνων δικαστὰς ὁρκίους αἱρουμένη θεσμὸν τὸν εἰς ἅπαντ’ ἐγὼ θήσω χρόνον.
But since this matter has come to this point, I, choosing sworn judges of homicide, will establish a law for all time.

256	ὑμεῖς δὲ μαρτύριά τε καὶ τεκμήρια καλεῖσθ’, ἀρωγὰ τῆς δίκης ὁρκώματα.
You, then, summon your witnesses and proofs, sworn evidence to support your case.

257	κρίνασα δ’ ἀστῶν τῶν ἐμῶν τὰ βέλτατα ἥξω, διαιρεῖν τοῦτο πρᾶγμ’ ἐτητύμως, ὅρκον πορόντας μηδὲν ἔκδικον φράσειν.
And having selected the best of my citizens, I will come to decide this matter truly, after they have taken an oath to pronounce no judgment contrary to justice.

258 νῦν καταστροφαὶ νέων θεσμίων, εἰ κρατήσει δίκα τε καὶ βλάβα τοῦδε ματροκτόνου.
Now are the overturnings of new laws, to see if justice or harm will prevail in the case of this matricide.

259 πάντας ἤδη τόδ’ ἔργον εὐχερείᾳ συναρμόσει βροτούς;
Now this deed will easily accustom all men;

260 πολλὰ δ’ ἔτυμα παιδότρωτα πάθεα προσμένει τοκεῦσιν μεταῦθις ἐν χρόνῳ.
and many true child-wrought sorrows await parents in the time to come.

261 οὐδὲ γὰρ βροτοσκόπων μαινάδων τῶνδ’ ἐφέρψει κότος τις ἐργμάτων — πάντ’ ἐφήσω μόρον.
For no wrath of these watching Furies will stealthily come upon such deeds — I will set loose fate in every form.

262 πεύσεται δ’ ἄλλος ἄλλοθεν, προφωνῶν τὰ τῶν πέλας κακά, λῆξιν ὑπόδοσίν τε μόχθων;
And each will learn from others, speaking of their neighbors' woes, seeking an end to their troubles and relief from their toils;

263 ἄκεά τ’ οὐ βέβαια τλάμων δέ τις μάταν παρηγορεῖ.
Enduring uncertain sorrows, one vainly offers consolation.

264 μηδέ τις κικλῃσκέτω ξυμφορᾷ τετυμμένος, τοῦτ’ ἔπος θροούμενος, ὦ δίκα, ὦ θρόνοι τ’ Ἐρινύων.
Let no one, doomed by misfortune, cry out these words in lamentation: O Justice, O thrones of the Furies!

265	ταῦτά τις τάχ’ ἂν πατὴρ ἢ τεκοῦσα νεοπαθὴς οἶκτον οἰκτίσαιτ’, ἐπειδὴ πίτνει δόμος δίκας.
Perhaps a father or a mother, recently wronged, might lament with pity when the house of justice falls.

266	ἔσθ’ ὅπου τὸ δεινὸν εὖ, καὶ φρενῶν ἐπίσκοπον δεῖ μένειν καθήμενον.
There is a place where fear is beneficial, and it must remain seated as a guardian of the heart.

267	ξυμφέρει σωφρονεῖν ὑπὸ στένει.
It is advantageous to be prudent under pressure.

268	τίς δὲ μηδὲν

 ἐν δέει καρδίαν ἂν ἀνατρέφων ἢ πόλις βροτός θ’ ὁμοίως ἔτ’ ἂν σέβοι δίκαν;
Who, without nurturing fear in their heart, or what mortal or city, would still revere justice?

269	μήτ’ ἀνάρχετον βίον μήτε δεσποτούμενον αἰνέσῃς.
Do not praise a life without rule or one governed by tyranny.

270	παντὶ μέσῳ τὸ κράτος θεὸς ὤπασεν, ἄλλ’ ἄλλᾳ δ’ ἐφορεύει.
For in all things, power is given by the god to moderation, but he oversees differently in other matters.

271	ξύμμετρον δ’ ἔπος λέγω, δυσσεβίας μὲν ὕβρις τέκος ὡς ἐτύμως;
I speak a balanced word: indeed, arrogance is the true offspring of impiety.

272	ἐκ δ’ ὑγιείας φρενῶν ὁ πάμφιλος καὶ πολύευκτος ὄλβος.
But from the health of the mind comes beloved and much-prayed-for happiness.

273	ἐς τὸ πᾶν δέ σοι λέγω, βωμὸν αἴδεσαι Δίκας;
And overall, I tell you, revere the altar of Justice.

274	μηδέ νιν κέρδος ἰδὼν ἀθέῳ ποδὶ λὰξ ἀτίσῃς;
Do not dishonor it by spurning with a godless foot, looking to profit.

275	ποινὰ γὰρ ἐπέσται.
For punishment will follow.

276	κύριον μένει τέλος.
The appointed fulfillment remains.

277	πρὸς τάδε τις τοκέων σέβας εὖ προτίων καὶ ξενοτίμους δόμων ἐπιστροφὰς αἰδόμενός τις ἔστω.
Let someone who rightly puts first

 the reverence owed to parents and the respect for guests welcomed in their house be esteemed.

278	ἑκὼν δ’ ἀνάγκας ἄτερ δίκαιος ὢν οὐκ ἄνολβος ἔσται.
One who is just willingly, without compulsion, will not lack happiness.

279	πανώλεθρος δ’ οὔποτ’ ἂν γένοιτο.
Such a person will never be utterly destroyed.

280	τὸν ἀντίτολμον δέ φαμι παρβάταν ἄγοντα πολλὰ παντόφυρτ’ ἄνευ δίκας βιαίως ξὺν χρόνῳ καθήσειν λαῖφος, ὅταν λάβῃ πόνος θραυομένας κεραίας.
And I declare that the one who boldly transgresses, amassing many things unjustly and by force, in time will be brought low in ruin when trouble breaks his strength.


281	καλεῖ δ’ ἀκούοντας οὐδὲν ἐν μέσᾳ δυσπαλεῖ τε δίνᾳ ·
He calls on those who hear nothing and he struggles in the midst of the whirling waters.

282	γελᾷ δὲ δαίμων ἐπ’ ἀνδρὶ θερμῷ , τὸν οὔποτ’ αὐχοῦντ’ ἰδὼν ἀμαχάνοις δύαις λαπαδνὸν οὐδ’ ὑπερθέοντ’ ἄκραν ·
The god laughs at the hot-headed man, seeing him, who boasted that this would never happen, exhausted by distress without remedy and unable to surmount the cresting wave. 

283	δι’ αἰῶνος δὲ τὸν πρὶν ὄλβον ἕρματι προσβαλὼν δίκας ὤλετ’ ἄκλαυτος , αἶστος .
He wrecks the happiness of his earlier life on the reef of Justice, and he perishes unwept, unseen.


284	κήρυσσε , κῆρυξ , καὶ στρατὸν κατειργαθοῦ , ἥ τ’ οὖν διάτορος Τυρσηνικὴ σάλπιγξ , βροτείου πνεύματος πληρουμένη , ὑπέρτονον γήρυμα φαινέτω στρατῷ .
Herald, give the signal and restrain the crowd; and let the piercing Tyrrhenian trumpet, filled with human breath, send forth its shrill blare to the people!

285	πληρουμένου γὰρ τοῦδε βουλευτηρίου σιγᾶν ἀρήγει καὶ μαθεῖν θεσμοὺς ἐμοὺς πόλιν τε πᾶσαν εἰς τὸν αἰανῆ χρόνον καὶ τούσδ’ ὅπως ἂν εὖ καταγνωσθῇ δίκη .
For while this council-hall is filling, it is good to be silent, and for my ordinances to be learned, by the whole city for everlasting time, and by these appellants, so that their case may be decided well.

286	ἄναξ Ἄπολλον, ὧν ἔχεις αὐτὸς κράτει.
Lord Apollo, be master of what is yours.

287	τί τοῦδε σοὶ μέτεστι πράγματος λέγε.
Say what part you have in this matter.

288	καὶ μαρτυρήσων ἦλθον — ἔστι γὰρ νόμῳ ἱκέτης ὅδ’ ἁνὴρ καὶ δόμων ἐφέστιος ἐμῶν, φόνου δὲ τοῦδ’ ἐγὼ καθάρσιος — καὶ ξυνδικήσων αὐτός.
Apollo: I have come both to bear witness—for this man was a lawful suppliant and a guest of my sanctuary, and I am his purifier from bloodshed—and to be his advocate myself.

289	αἰτίαν δ’ ἔχω τῆς τοῦδε μητρὸς τοῦ φόνου.
I am responsible for the murder of his mother.

290	σὺ δ’ εἴσαγε ὅπως τ’ ἐπίστᾳ τήνδε κύρωσον δίκην.
To Athena: Bring in the case, and, in accordance with your wisdom, decide it.

291	ὑμῶν ὁ μῦθος, εἰσάγω δὲ τὴν δίκην.
Athena: To the Furies: It is for you to speak—I am only bringing in the case; for the prosecutor at the beginning, speaking first, shall rightly inform us of the matter.

292	ὁ γὰρ διώκων πρότερος ἐξ ἀρχῆς λέγων γένοιτ’ ἂν ὀρθῶς πράγματος διδάσκαλος.
Chorus: We are many, but we will speak briefly. To Orestes: Answer our questions, one by one. Say first if you killed your mother.

293	πολλαὶ μέν ἐσμεν, λέξομεν δὲ συντόμως.
294	ἔπος δ’ ἀμείβου πρὸς ἔπος ἐν μέρει τιθείς τὴν μητέρ’ εἰπὲ πρῶτον εἰ κατέκτονας.
Orestes

294	ἔπος δ’ ἀμείβου πρὸς ἔπος ἐν μέρει τιθείς τὴν μητέρ’ εἰπὲ πρῶτον εἰ κατέκτονας.
Answer our questions, one by one. Say first if you killed your mother.

295	ἔκτεινα.
Orestes: I killed her.

296	τούτου δ’ οὔτις ἄρνησις πέλει.
There is no denial of this.

297	ἓν μὲν τόδ’ ἤδη τῶν τριῶν παλαισμάτων.
Chorus: Of the three falls that win the wrestling match, this one is already ours.

298	οὐ κειμένῳ πω τόνδε κομπάζεις λόγον.
Orestes: You make this boast over a man who is not down yet.

299	εἰπεῖν γε μέντοι δεῖ σ’ ὅπως κατέκτανες.
Chorus: You must, however, say how you killed her.

300	λέγω.
Orestes: I will say it:

301	ξιφουλκῷ χειρὶ πρὸς δέρην τεμών.
with drawn sword in hand, I stabbed her in the throat.

302	πρὸς τοῦ δ’ ἐπείσθης καὶ τίνος βουλεύμασιν;
Chorus: By whom were you persuaded and on whose advice?

303	τοῖς τοῦδε θεσφάτοισι.
Orestes: By the oracles of this god here; he is my witness.

304	μαρτυρεῖ δέ μοι.
305	ὁ μάντις ἐξηγεῖτό σοι μητροκτονεῖν;
Chorus: The prophet directed you to kill your mother?

306	καὶ δεῦρό γ’ ἀεὶ τὴν τύχην οὐ μέμφομαι.
Orestes: Yes, and to this very hour, I do not blame my fortune.

307	ἀλλ’ εἴ σε μάρψει ψῆφος, ἄλλ’ ἐρεῖς τάχα.
Chorus: But if the jury’s vote catches hold of you, you’ll soon speak differently.

308	πέποιθ’.
Orestes: I have good confidence.

309	ἀρωγὰς δ’ ἐκ τάφου πέμψει πατήρ.
My father will send protection from his

309	ἀρωγὰς δ’ ἐκ τάφου πέμψει πατήρ.
My father will send protection from his grave.

310	νεκροῖσί νυν πέπισθι μητέρα κτανών.
Chorus: Put your confidence in the dead now, after you have killed your mother!

311	δυοῖν γὰρ εἶχε προσβολὰς μιασμάτοιν.
Orestes: I do, for she was twice afflicted with pollution.

312 πῶς δή;
How so? 

313 δίδαξον τοὺς δικάζοντας τάδε.
Teach the judges this.

314 ἀνδροκτονοῦσα πατέρ’ ἐμὸν κατέκτανεν.
By murdering her husband, she killed my father.

315	τοιγὰρ σὺ μὲν ζῇς, ἡ δ’ ἐλευθέρα φόνῳ.
And so, although you are alive, she is free of pollution by her death.

316	τί δ’ οὐκ ἐκείνην ζῶσαν ἤλαυνες φυγῇ;
But why did you not drive her into exile, while she lived?

317	οὐκ ἦν ὅμαιμος φωτὸς ὃν κατέκτανεν.
Chorus: She was not related by blood to the man she killed.

318	ἐγὼ δὲ μητρὸς τῆς ἐμῆς ἐν αἵματι;
Orestes: Then am I my mother’s kin by blood?

319	πῶς γάρ σ’ ἔθρεψ’ ἂν ἐντός, ὦ μιαιφόνε, ζώνης; ἀπεύχῃ μητρὸς αἷμα φίλτατον;
Chorus: How else could she have nurtured you, murderer, beneath her belt? 

320	ἀπεύχῃ μητρὸς αἷμα φίλτατον ;
Do you reject the nearest kinship, that of a mother?

321	ἤδη σὺ μαρτύρησον;
Give your testimony now.

322	ἐξηγοῦ δέ μοι, Ἄπολλον, εἴ σφε σὺν δίκῃ κατέκτανον.
Explain, on my behalf, Apollo, whether I was justified in killing her. 

323	δρᾶσαι γὰρ ὥσπερ ἐστὶν οὐκ ἀρνούμεθα. 
For I do not deny that I did it, as it is done.

324 ἀλλ’ εἰ δίκαιον εἴτε μὴ τῇ σῇ φρενὶ δοκεῖ τόδ’ αἷμα, κρῖνον, ὡς τούτοις φράσω.
But decide whether this bloodshed was, to your mind, just or not, so that I may inform the court.

325	λέξω πρὸς ὑμᾶς τόνδ’ Ἀθηναίας μέγαν θεσμὸν δικαίως, — μάντις ὢν δ’ οὐ ψεύσομαι.
Apollo: I will speak justly before you, Athena’s great tribunal,—since I am a prophet, I cannot lie.

326	οὐπώποτ’ εἶπον μαντικοῖσιν ἐν θρόνοις, οὐκ ἀνδρός, οὐ γυναικός, οὐ πόλεως πέρι, ὃ μὴ κελεύσαι Ζεὺς Ὀλυμπίων πατήρ.
I have never yet, on my oracular throne, said anything about a man or woman or city that Zeus, the father of the Olympians, did not command me to say.

327	τὸ μὲν δίκαιον τοῦθ’ ὅσον σθένει μαθεῖν , βουλῇ πιφαύσκω δ’ ὔμμ’ ἐπισπέσθαι πατρός ·
Learn how strong this plea of justice is;
and I tell you to obey the will of my father; 

328	ὅρκος γὰρ οὔτι Ζηνὸς ἰσχύει πλέον .
for an oath is not more powerful than Zeus.

329	Ζεύς , ὡς λέγεις σύ , τόνδε χρησμὸν ὤπασε , φράζειν Ὀρέστῃ τῷδε , τὸν πατρὸς φόνον πράξαντα μητρὸς μηδαμοῦ τιμὰς νέμειν ;
Zeus, as you say, gave you this oracular command, to tell Orestes here to avenge his father’s murder but to take no account at all of the honor due his mother?

330	οὐ γάρ τι τ- αὐτὸν ἄνδρα γενναῖον θανεῖν διοσδότοις σκήπτροισι τιμαλφούμενον , καὶ ταῦτα πρὸς γυναικός , οὔ τι θουρίοις τόξοις ἑκηβόλοισιν , ὥστ’ Ἀμαζόνος , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἀκούσῃ , Παλλὰς οἵ τ’ ἐφήμενοι ψήφῳ διαιρεῖν τοῦδε πράγματος πέρι .
Yes, for it is not the same thing—the murder of a noble man, honored by a god-given scepter, and his murder indeed by a woman, not by rushing arrows sped from afar, as if by an Amazon, but as you will hear, Pallas, and those who are sitting to decide by vote in this matter.

331	ἀπὸ στρατείας γάρ νιν ἠμποληκότα τὰ πλεῖστ’ ἄμεινον εὔφροσιν δεδεγμένη , δροίτῃ περῶντι λουτρὰ κ- ἐπὶ τέρματι φᾶρος περεσκήνωσεν , ἐν δ’ ἀτέρμονι κόπτει πεδήσασ’ ἄνδρα δαιδάλῳ πέπλῳ .
She received him from the expedition, where he had for the most part won success beyond expectation, in the judgment of those favorable to him; then, as he was stepping from the bath, on its very edge, she threw a cloak like a tent over it, fettered her husband in an embroidered robe, and cut him down. 

332	ἀνδρὸς μὲν ὑμῖν οὗτος εἴρηται μόρος τοῦ παντοσέμνου , τοῦ στρατηλάτου νεῶν .
This was his death, as I have told it to you—the death of a man wholly majestic, commander of the fleet. 


333	ταύτην τοιαύτην εἶπον , ὡς δηχθῇ λεώς , ὅσπερ τέτακται τήνδε κυρῶσαι δίκην .
As for that woman, I have described her in such a way as to whet the indignation of the people who have been appointed to decide this case.


334	πατρὸς προτιμᾷ Ζεὺς μόρον τῷ σῷ λόγῳ;
Zeus gives greater honor to a father’s death, according to what you say; yet he himself bound his aged father, Cronus.

335	αὐτὸς δ’ ἔδησε πατέρα πρεσβύτην Κρόνον.
How does this not contradict what you say? I call on you as witnesses.

336	πῶς ταῦτα τούτοις οὐκ ἐναντίως λέγεις;
Turning to the judges to hear these things.

337	ὑμᾶς δ’ ἀκούειν ταῦτ’ ἐγὼ μαρτύρομαι.
Apollo: Oh, monsters utterly

337	ὑμᾶς δ’ ἀκούειν ταῦτ’ ἐγὼ μαρτύρομαι.
Apollo: Oh, monsters utterly loathed and detested by the gods!

338	ὦ παντομισῆ κνώδαλα, στύγη θεῶν, πέδας μὲν ἂν λύσειεν, ἔστι τοῦδ’ ἄκος καὶ κάρτα πολλὴ μηχανὴ λυτήριος;
Zeus could undo fetters, there is a remedy for that, and many means of release.

339	ἀνδρὸς δ’ ἐπειδὰν αἷμ’ ἀνασπάσῃ κόνις ἅπαξ θανόντος, οὔτις ἔστ’ ἀνάστασις.
But when the dust has drawn up the blood of a man, once he is dead, there is no return to life.

340	τούτων ἐπῳδὰς οὐκ ἐποίησεν πατὴρ οὑμός, τὰ δ’ ἄλλα πάντ’ ἄνω τε καὶ κάτω στρέφων τίθησιν οὐδὲν ἀσθμαίνων μένει.
For this, my father has made no magic spells, although he arranges all other things, turning them up and down; nor does his exercise of force cost him a breath.

341	πῶς γὰρ τὸ φεύγειν τοῦδ’ ὑπερδικεῖς ὅρα;
Chorus: See how you advocate acquittal for this man!

342	τὸ μητρὸς αἷμ’ ὅμαιμον ἐκχέας πέδοι ἔπειτ’ ἐν Ἄργει δώματ’ οἰκήσει πατρός;
After he has poured out his mother’s blood on the ground, shall he then live in his father’s house in Argos?

343	ποίοισι βωμοῖς χρώμενος τοῖς δημίοις;
Which of the public altars shall he use?

344	ποία δὲ χέρνιψ φρατέρων προσδέξεται;
What purification rite of the brotherhoods will receive him?

345	καὶ τοῦτο λέξω, καὶ μάθ’ ὡς ὀρθῶς ἐρῶ.
Apollo: I will explain this, too, and see how correctly I will speak.

346	οὔκ ἔστι μήτηρ ἡ κεκλημένου τέκνου τοκεύς, τροφὸς δὲ κύματος νεοσπόρου.
The mother of what is called her child is not the parent, but the nurse of the newly-sown embryo.

347	τίκτει δ’ ὁ θρῴσκων, ἡ δ’ ἅπερ ξένῳ ξένη ἔσωσεν ἔρνος, οἷσι μὴ βλάψῃ θεός.
The one who mounts is the parent, whereas she, as a stranger for a stranger, preserves the young plant, if the god does not harm it.

348	τεκμήριον δὲ τοῦδέ σοι δείξω λόγου.
And I will show you proof of what I say:

349	πατὴρ μὲν ἂν γένοιτ’ ἄνευ μητρός.
a father might exist without a mother.

350	πέλας μάρτυς πάρεστι παῖς Ὀλυμπίου Διός, οὐδ’ ἐν σκότοισι νηδύος τεθραμμένη, ἀλλ’ οἷον ἔρνος οὔτις ἂν τέκοι θεός.
A witness is here at hand, the child of Olympian Zeus, who was not nursed in the darkness of a womb, and she is such a child as no goddess could give birth to.

351	ἐγὼ δέ, Παλλάς, τ- ἄλλα θ’ ὡς ἐπίσταμαι, τὸ σὸν πόλισμα καὶ στρατὸν τεύξω μέγαν, καὶ τόνδ’ ἔπεμψα σῶν δόμων ἐφέστιον, ὅπως γένοιτο πιστὸς εἰς τὸ πᾶν χρόνου καὶ τόνδ’ ἐπικτήσαιο σύμμαχον, θεά, καὶ τοὺς ἔπειτα, καὶ τάδ’ αἰανῶς μένοι στέργειν τὰ πιστὰ τῶνδε τοὺς ἐπισπόρους.
For my part, Pallas,

 as in all other matters, as I know how, I will make your city and people great; and I have sent this man as a suppliant to your sanctuary so that he may be faithful for all time, and that you, goddess, might win him and those to come after him as a new ally and so that these pledges of faith might remain always, for the later generations of these people to cherish.

352	ἤδη κελεύω τούσδ’ ἀπὸ γνώμης φέρειν ψῆφον δικαίαν, ὡς ἅλις λελεγμένων;
Athena: Am I to assume that enough has been said, and shall I now command these jurors to cast an honest vote according to their judgment?

353	ἡμῖν μὲν ἤδη πᾶν τετόξευται βέλος.
Chorus: For our part, every bolt is already shot.

354	μένω δ’ ἀκοῦσαι πῶς ἀγὼν κριθήσεται.
But I am waiting to hear how the trial will be decided.

355	τί γάρ;

Athena: Why not? 

356	πρὸς ὑμῶν πῶς τιθεῖσ’, ἄμομφος ὦ;
As for you, how shall I arrange matters so that I will not be blamed by you?

357	ἠκούσαθ’ ὧν ἠκούσατ’, ἐν δὲ καρδίᾳ ψῆφον φέροντες ὅρκον αἰδεῖσθε, ξένοι.
You have heard what you have heard; and as you cast your ballots, keep the oath sacred in your hearts, friends.

358	κλύοιτ’ ἂν ἤδη θεσμόν, Ἀττικὸς λεώς, πρώτας δίκας κρίνοντες αἵματος χυτοῦ.
Athena: Hear now my ordinance, people of Attica, as you judge the first trial for bloodshed.

359	ἔσται δὲ καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν Αἰγέως στρατῷ αἰεὶ δικαστῶν τοῦτο βουλευτήριον.
In the future, even as now, this court of judges will always exist for the people of Aegeus.

360	πάγον δ’ Ἄρειον τόνδ’, Ἀμαζόνων ἕδραν σκηνάς θ’, ὅτ’ ἦλθον Θησέως κατὰ φθόνον στρατηλατοῦσαι, καὶ πόλιν νεόπτολιν τήνδ’ ὑψίπυργον ἀντεπύργωσαν τότε, Ἄρει δ’ ἔθυον, ἔ

360	πάγον δ’ Ἄρειον τόνδ’, Ἀμαζόνων ἕδραν σκηνάς θ’, ὅτ’ ἦλθον Θησέως κατὰ φθόνον στρατηλατοῦσαι, καὶ πόλιν νεόπτολιν τήνδ’ ὑψίπυργον ἀντεπύργωσαν τότε, Ἄρει δ’ ἔθυον, ἔνθεν ἔστ’ ἐπώνυμος πέτρα, πάγος τ’ Ἄρειος;
And this Hill of Ares, the seat and camp of the Amazons, when they came with an army in resentment against Theseus, and in those days built up this new citadel with lofty towers to rival his, and sacrificed to Ares, from which this rock takes its name, the Hill of Ares:

361	ἐν δὲ τῷ σέβας ἀστῶν φόβος τε ξυγγενὴς τὸ μὴ ἀδικεῖν σχήσει τό τ’ ἦμαρ καὶ κατ’ εὐφρόνην ὁμῶς, αὐτῶν πολιτῶν μὴ ’πιχραινόντων νόμους κακαῖς ἐπιρροαῖσι;
on this hill, the reverence of the citizens, and fear, its kinsman, will hold them back from doing wrong by day and night alike, so long as they themselves do not pollute the laws with evil streams;

362	βορβόρῳ δ’ ὕδωρ λαμπρὸν μιαίνων οὔποθ’ εὑρήσεις ποτόν.
if you stain clear water with filth, you will never find a drink.

363	τὸ μήτ’ ἄναρχον μήτε δεσποτούμενον ἀστοῖς περιστέλλουσι βουλεύω σέβειν, καὶ μὴ τὸ δεινὸν πᾶν πόλεως ἔξω βαλεῖν.
Neither anarchy nor tyranny—this I counsel my citizens to support and respect, and not to drive fear wholly out of the city.

364	τίς γὰρ δεδοικὼς μηδὲν ἔνδικος βροτῶν;
For who among mortals, if he fears nothing, is righteous?

365	τοιόνδε τοι ταρβοῦντες ἐνδίκως σέβας ἔρυμά τ

365	τοιόνδε τοι ταρβοῦντες ἐνδίκως σέβας ἔρυμά τε χώρας καὶ πόλεως σωτήριον ἔχοιτ’ ἄν, οἷον οὔτις ἀνθρώπων ἔχει, οὔτ’ ἐν Σκύθῃσιν οὔτε Πέλοπος ἐν τόποις.
Stand in just awe of such majesty, and you will have a defense for your land and salvation of your city, such as no man has, either among the Scythians or in Pelops’ realm.

366	κερδῶν ἄθικτον τοῦτο βουλευτήριον, αἰδοῖον, ὀξύθυμον, εὑδόντων ὕπερ ἐγρηγορὸς φρούρημα γῆς καθίσταμαι.
I establish this tribunal, untouched by greed, worthy of reverence, quick to anger, awake on behalf of those who sleep, a guardian of the land.

367	ταύτην μὲν ἐξέτειν’ ἐμοῖς παραίνεσιν ἀστοῖσιν εἰς τὸ λοιπόν;
I have prolonged this advice to my citizens for the future;

368	ὀρθοῦσθαι δὲ χρὴ καὶ ψῆφον αἴρειν καὶ διαγνῶναι δίκην αἰδουμένους τὸν ὅρκον.
but now you must rise and take a ballot, and decide the case under the sacred obligation of your oath.

369	εἴρηται λόγος.
My word has been spoken. 

370	καὶ μὴν βαρεῖαν τήνδ’ ὁμιλίαν χθονὸς ξύμβουλός εἰμι μηδαμῶς ἀτιμάσαι.
And I counsel you not to dishonor us in any way, since our company can be a burden to your land.

371	κ- ἔγωγε χρησμοὺς τοὺς ἐμούς τε καὶ Διὸς ταρβεῖν κελεύω μηδ’ ἀκαρπώτους κτίσαι.
Apollo: And I, for my part, command you to stand in fear of the oracles, both mine and Zeus’, and not cause them to be unfulfilled.

372	ἀλλ’ αἱματηρὰ πράγματ’ οὐ λαχὼν σέβεις, μαντεῖα δ’ οὐκέθ’ ἁγνὰ μαντεύσῃ νέμων.
Chorus: Although it is not your office, you have respect for deeds of bloodshed. You will prophesy, dispensing prophecies that are no longer pure.

373	ἦ καὶ πατήρ τι σφάλλεται βουλευμάτων πρωτοκτόνοισι προστροπαῖς Ἰξίονος?
Apollo: Then was my father mistaken in any way in his purposes when Ixion, who first shed blood, was a suppliant?

374	λέγεις;
Chorus: You do argue! 

375	ἐγὼ δὲ μὴ τυχοῦσα τῆς δίκης βαρεῖα χώρᾳ τῇδ’ ὁμιλήσω πάλιν.
But if I fail to win the case, I will once more inflict my company on this land as a burden.

376 ἀλλ’ ἔν τε τοῖς νέοισι καὶ παλαιτέροις θεοῖς ἄτιμος εἶ σύ;
But you have no honor, among both the younger and the older gods.

377	νικήσω δ’ ἐγώ .
I will win.

378 τοιαῦτ’ ἔδρασας καὶ Φέρητος ἐν δόμοις;
Chorus: You did such things also in the house of Pheres, when you persuaded the Fates to make mortals free from death.

379 Μοίρας ἔπεισας ἀφθίτους θεῖναι βροτούς.
Apollo: You persuaded the Fates to allow mortals to be undying.

380 οὔκουν δίκαιον τὸν σέβοντ’ εὐεργετεῖν, ἄλλως τε πάντως κ- ὅτε δεόμενος τύχοι?
Is it not right, then, to do good for a worshipper, especially when he is in need?

381 σύ τοι παλαιὰς διανομὰς καταφθίσας οἴνῳ παρηπάτησας ἀρχαίας θεάς.
Chorus: It was you who destroyed the old dispensations when you beguiled the ancient goddesses with wine.

382 σύ τοι τάχ’ οὐκ ἔχουσα τῆς δίκης τέλος ἐμῇ τὸν ἰὸν οὐδὲν ἐχθροῖσιν βαρύν.
Soon, when you have lost the case, you will spit out your venom—no great burden to your enemies.

383 ἐπεὶ καθιππάζῃ με πρεσβῦτιν νέος, δίκης γενέσθαι τῆσδ’ ἐπήκοος μένω, ὡς ἀμφίβουλος οὖσα θυμοῦσθαι πόλει.
Chorus: Since you, a youth, would ride me down, an old woman, I am waiting to hear the verdict in the case, since I have not decided whether to be angry at the city.

384 ἐμὸν τόδ’ ἔργον, λοισθίαν κρῖναι δίκην.
Athena: It is my duty to give the final judgment and I shall cast my vote for Orestes.

385 ψῆφον δ’ Ὀρέστῃ τήνδ’ ἐγὼ προσθήσομαι.
For there was no mother who gave me birth; and in all things, except for marriage, whole-heartedly I am for the male and entirely on the father’s side.

386	μήτηρ γὰρ οὔτις ἐστὶν ἥ μ’ ἐγείνατο, τὸ δ’ ἄρσεν αἰνῶ πάντα, πλὴν γάμου τυχεῖν, ἅπαντι θυμῷ, κάρτα δ’ εἰμὶ τοῦ πατρός.
For there was no mother who gave me birth; and in all things, except for marriage, whole-heartedly I am for the male and entirely on the father’s side.

387	οὕτω γυναικὸς οὐ προτιμήσω μόρον ἄνδρα κτανούσης δωμάτων ἐπίσκοπον.
Therefore, I will not award greater honor to the death of a woman who killed her husband, the master of the house.

388	νικᾷ δ’ Ὀρέστης, κἂν ἰσόψηφος κριθῇ.
Orestes wins, even if the vote comes out equal.

389	ἐκβάλλεθ’ ὡς τάχιστα τευχέων πάλους, ὅσοις δικαστῶν τοῦτ’ ἐπέσταλται τέλος.
Cast the ballots out of the urns, as quickly as possible, you jurors who have been assigned this task.

390	ὦ Φοῖβ’ Ἄπολλον, πῶς ἀγὼν κριθήσεται;
Orestes: O Phoebus Apollo! How will the trial be decided?

391	ὦ Νὺξ μέλαινα μῆτερ, ἆρ’ ὁρᾷς τάδε;
Chorus: O Night, our dark Mother, do you see this?

392	νῦν ἀγχόνης μοι τέρματ’, ἢ φάος βλέπειν.
Orestes: Now I will meet my end by hanging, or I will live.


393	ἡμῖν γὰρ ἔρρειν, ἢ πρόσω τιμὰς νέμειν.
Yes, and we will be ruined, or maintain our honors further.

394	πεμπάζετ' ὀρθῶς ἐκβολὰς ψήφων, ξένοι, τὸ μὴ ’δικεῖν σέβοντες ἐν διαιρέσει.
Apollo: Correctly count the ballots cast forth, friends, and be in awe of doing wrong in the division of the votes.

395 γνώμης δ’ ἀπούσης πῆμα γίγνεται μέγα, βαλοῦσά τ’ οἶκον ψῆφος ὤρθωσεν μία.
Error of judgment is the source of much distress, and the cast of a single ballot has set upright a house.

396 ἀνὴρ ὅδ’ ἐκπέφευγεν αἵματος δίκην;
Athena: This man is acquitted on the charge of murder, for the numbers of the casts are equal.

397 ἴσον γάρ ἐστι τ- ἀρίθμημα τῶν πάλων.
Apollo disappears.

398 ὦ Παλλάς, ὦ

398 ὦ Παλλάς, ὦ σώσασα τοὺς ἐμοὺς δόμους.
Orestes: Pallas, savior of my house!

399 γαίας πατρῴας ἐστερημένον σύ τοι κατῴκισάς με;
I was deprived of a fatherland, and it is you who have given me a home there again.

400 καί τις Ἑλλήνων ἐρεῖ, Ἀργεῖος ἁνὴρ αὖθις ἔν τε χρήμασιν οἰκεῖ πατρῴοις, Παλλάδος καὶ Λοξίου ἕκατι, καὶ τοῦ πάντα κραίνοντος τρίτου σωτῆρος, ὃς πατρῷον αἰδεσθεὶς μόρον σῴζει με, μητρὸς τάσδε συνδίκους ὁρῶν.
The Hellenes will say, "The man is an Argive once again, and lives in his father’s heritage, by the grace of Pallas and of Loxias and of that third savior god, who, having respect for my father’s death, saves me, seeing those advocates of my mother."

401 ἐγὼ δὲ χώρᾳ τῇδε καὶ τῷ σῷ στρατῷ τὸ λοιπὸν εἰς ἅπαντα πλειστήρη χρόνον ὁρκωμοτήσας νῦν ἄπειμι πρὸς δόμους, μήτοι τιν’ ἄνδρα δεῦρο πρυμνήτην χθονὸς ἐλθόντ’ ἐποίσειν εὖ κεκασμένον δόρυ.
I will return to my home now, after I swear an oath to this land and to your people for the future and for all time to come, that no captain of my land will ever come here and bring a well-equipped spear against them.

402	αὐτοὶ γὰρ ἡμεῖς ὄντες ἐν τάφοις τότε τοῖς τ- ἐμὰ παρβαίνουσι νῦν ὁρκώματα ἀμηχάνοισι πράξομεν δυσπραξίαις, ὁδοὺς ἀθύμους καὶ παρόρνιθας πόρους τιθέντες, ὡς αὐτοῖσι μεταμέλῃ πόνος.
For I myself, then in my grave, will bring about irremediable misfortunes for those who break these oaths now, creating spiritless and ill-omened paths for them, so that they will regret their effort.

403	ὀρθουμένων δέ, καὶ πόλιν τὴν Παλλάδος τιμῶσιν αἰεὶ τήνδε συμμάχῳ δορί, αὐτοῖσιν ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν εὐμενέστεροι.
But if they remain just and always honor this city of Pallas with their allied spear, we will be more favorably disposed towards them.

404	καὶ χαῖρε, καὶ σὺ καὶ πολισσοῦχος λεώς.
And so farewell, you and the people who guard your city.

405	πάλαισμ’ ἄφυκτον τοῖς ἐναντίοις ἔχοις, σωτήριόν τε καὶ δορὸς νικηφόρον.
May you have an inescapable wrestling hold against your adversaries, bringing you safety and victory with the spear!

406 ἰὼ θεοὶ νεώτεροι, παλαιοὺς νόμους καθιππάσασθε κ- ἐκ χερῶν εἵλεσθέ μου.
Chorus: Younger gods, you have ridden down the ancient laws and have taken them from my hands!

407 ἐγὼ δ’ ἄτιμος ἁ τάλαινα βαρύκοτος ἐν γᾷ τᾷδε, φεῦ, ἰὸν ἰὸν ἀντιπενθῆ μεθεῖσα καρδίας, σταλαγμὸν χθονὶ ἄφορον.
Chorus: And I, dishonored, unhappy, deeply angry—on this land, alas, I will release venom from my heart,

407 ἐγὼ δ’ ἄτιμος ἁ τάλαινα βαρύκοτος ἐν γᾷ τᾷδε, φεῦ, ἰὸν ἰὸν ἀντιπενθῆ μεθεῖσα καρδίας, σταλαγμὸν χθονὶ ἄφορον.
Chorus: And I, dishonored and wretchedly angry, in this land, alas, will cast forth from my heart sorrowful venom, a drop that the earth cannot endure.

408 ἐκ δὲ τοῦ λειχὴν ἄφυλλος, ἄτεκνος, ἰὼ δίκα, πέδον ἐπισύμενος βροτοφθόρους κηλῖδας ἐν χώρᾳ βαλεῖ.
From it, leafless blight, childlessness, alas, justice, will spread over the land, casting ruinous stains upon the earth.

409 στενάζω;
Chorus: I groan.

410 τί ῥέξω;
Chorus: What shall I do?

411 γελῶμαι πολίταις.
Chorus: I am ridiculed by the citizens.

412 δύσοισθ’ ἅπαθον.
Chorus: Suffer painlessly.

413 ἰὼ μεγάλα τοι κόραι δυστυχεῖς Νυκτὸς ἀτιμοπενθεῖς.
Chorus: Alas, great indeed are

413 ἰὼ μεγάλα τοι κόραι δυστυχεῖς Νυκτὸς ἀτιμοπενθεῖς.
Chorus: Alas, the great, unfortunate daughters of Night, suffering dishonor!

414 ἐμοὶ πίθεσθε μὴ βαρυστόνως φέρειν.
Athena: Heed me, do not bear it too heavily.

415 οὐ γὰρ νενίκησθ’, ἀλλ’ ἰσόψηφος δίκη ἐξῆλθ’ ἀληθῶς, οὐκ ἀτιμίᾳ σέθεν.
Athena: For you were not defeated; the trial truly ended in an equal vote, not to your dishonor.

416 ἀλλ’ ἐκ Διὸς γὰρ λαμπρὰ μαρτύρια παρῆν, αὐτός θ’ ὁ χρήσας αὐτὸς ἦν ὁ μαρτυρῶν, ὡς ταῦτ’ Ὀρέστην δρῶντα μὴ βλάβας ἔχειν.
Athena: But there were clear testimonies from Zeus, and he who gave the oracle was himself the witness that Orestes, doing these things, would not suffer harm.

417 ὑμεῖς δὲ μὴ θυμοῦσθε μηδὲ τῇδε γῇ βαρὺν κότον σκήψητε, μηδ’ ἀκαρπίαν τεύξητ’, ἀφεῖσαι δαιμόνων σταλάγματα, βρωτῆρας αἰχμὰς σπερμάτων ἀνημέρους.
Athena: Do not be angry, nor cast heavy rage upon this land, nor create barrenness, releasing drops of the spirits, blights that ruin the seeds.

418 ἐγὼ γὰρ ὑμῖν πανδίκως ὑπίσχομαι ἕδρας τε καὶ κευθμῶνας ἐνδίκου χθονὸς λιπαροθρόνοισιν ἡμένας ἐπ’ ἐσχάραις ἕξειν ὑπ’ ἀστῶν τῶνδε τιμαλφουμένας.
For I promise you most sacredly that you will have a cavernous sanctuary in a righteous land, where you will sit on shining thrones at your hearths, worshipped with honor by my citizens here.

419 ἰὼ θεοὶ νεώτεροι, παλαιοὺς νόμους καθιππάσασθε κ- ἐκ χερῶν εἵλεσθέ μου.
Younger gods, you have ridden down the ancient laws and have taken them from my hands!

420 ἐγὼ δ’ ἄτιμος ἁ τάλαινα βαρύκοτος ἐν γᾷ τᾷδε, φεῦ, ἰὸν ἰὸν ἀντιπενθῆ μεθεῖσα καρδίας, σταλαγμὸν χθονὶ ἄφορον.
And I—dishonored, unhappy, deeply angry—on this land, alas, I will release venom from my heart, venom in return for my grief, drops that the land cannot endure.

421 ἐκ δὲ τοῦ λειχὴν ἄφυλλος, ἄτεκνος, ἰὼ δίκα, πέδον ἐπισύμενος βροτοφθόρους κηλῖδας ἐν χώρᾳ βαλεῖ.
From it, a blight that destroys leaves, destroys children—a just return—speeding over the plain, will cast infection on the land to ruin mortals.

422 στενάζω.
I groan aloud.

423 τί ῥέξω;
What shall I do?

424 γελῶμαι πολίταις.
I am mocked by the people.


425 δύσοισθ’ ἅπαθον.
What I have suffered is unbearable.

426 ἰὼ μεγάλα τοι κόραι δυστυχεῖς Νυκτὸς ἀτιμοπενθεῖς.
Ah, cruel indeed are the wrongs of the daughters of Night, mourning over dishonor!

427 οὐκ ἔστ’ ἄτιμοι, μηδ’ ὑπερθύμως ἄγαν θεαὶ βροτῶν κτίσητε δύσκηλον χθόνα.
You are not dishonored; so, although you are goddesses, do not, in excessive rage, blight past all cure a land of mortals.

428 κ- ἐγὼ πέποιθα Ζηνί, καὶ τί δεῖ λέγειν;
I also rely on Zeus—what need is there to mention that?

429 καὶ κλῇδας οἶδα δώματος μόνη θεῶν, ἐν ᾧ κεραυνός ἐστιν ἐσφραγισμένος.
And I alone of the gods know the keys to the house where his thunderbolt is sealed.

430 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν αὐτοῦ δεῖ.
But there is no need of that.

431 σὺ δ’ εὐπιθὴς ἐμοὶ γλώσσης ματαίας μὴ ’κβάλῃς ἔπη χθονί, καρπὸν φέροντα πάντα μὴ πράσσειν καλῶς κοίμα κελαινοῦ κύματος πικρὸν μένος ὡς σεμνότιμος καὶ ξυνοικήτωρ ἐμοί.
So yield to my persuasion and do not hurl the words of a reckless tongue against the land, that all things bearing fruit will

431 σὺ δ’ εὐπιθὴς ἐμοὶ γλώσσης ματαίας μὴ ’κβάλῃς ἔπη χθονί, καρπὸν φέροντα πάντα μὴ πράσσειν καλῶς κοίμα κελαινοῦ κύματος πικρὸν μένος ὡς σεμνότιμος καὶ ξυνοικήτωρ ἐμοί.
So yield to my persuasion and do not hurl the words of a reckless tongue against the land, ensuring that all things bearing fruit will not prosper, calm the black wave’s bitter anger, since you will be honored and live with me.

432 πολλῆς δὲ χώρας τῆσδ’ ἔτ’ ἀκροθίνια θύη πρὸ παίδων καὶ γαμηλίου τέλους ἔχουσ’ ἐς αἰεὶ τόνδ’ ἐπαινέσεις λόγον.
And when you have the first-fruits of this great land forever, offerings on behalf of children and of marriage rites, you will praise my counsel.

433 ἐμὲ παθεῖν τάδε, φεῦ, ἐμὲ παλαιόφρονα κατά τε γᾶς οἰκεῖν, φεῦ, ἀτίετον μύσος.
For me to suffer this, alas! For me, with ancient wisdom, to live beneath the earth, alas, without honor, unclean!

434 πνέω τοι μένος ἅπαντά τε κότον.
I am breathing fury and utter rage.

435	οἶ οἶ δᾶ , φεῦ .
Oh, oh, the shame of it! 

436	τίς μ’ ὑποδύεται , τίς ὀδύνα πλευράς ;
What anguish steals into my breast! 

437	θυμὸν ἄιε , μᾶτερ Νύξ ·
Hear my anger, mother Night;

438	ἀπὸ γάρ με τιμᾶν δαναιᾶν θεῶν δυσπάλαμοι παρ’ οὐδὲν ἦραν δόλοι .
for the deceptions of the gods, hard to fight, have deprived me of my ancient honors, bringing me to nothing.

439 ὀργὰς ξυνοίσω σοι;
I will endure your anger, 

440 γεραιτέρα γὰρ εἶ.
for you are older, 

441 καὶ τῷ μὲν εἶ σὺ κάρτ’ ἐμοῦ σοφωτέρα;
and in that respect you are surely wiser than I.

442 φρονεῖν δὲ κ- ἐμοὶ Ζεὺς ἔδωκεν οὐ κακῶς.
Yet Zeus has given me, too, no mean understanding.

443 ὑμεῖς δ’ ἐς ἀλλόφυλον ἐλθοῦσαι χθόνα γῆς τῆσδ’ ἐρασθήσεσθε;
But as for you, if you go to a foreign land, you will come to love this land—

444 προυννέπω τάδε.
I forewarn you.

445	οὑπιρρέων γὰρ τιμιώτερος χρόνος ἔσται πολίταις τοῖσδε.
For time, flowing on, will bring greater honor to these citizens.

446	καὶ σὺ τιμίαν ἕδραν ἔχουσα πρὸς δόμοις Ἐρεχθέως τεύξῃ παρ’ ἀνδρῶν καὶ γυναικείων στόλων, ὅσων παρ’ ἄλλων οὔποτ’ ἂν σχέθοις βροτῶν.
And you, having a seat of honor at the house of Erechtheus, will obtain from hosts of men and women more than you could ever win from other mortals.

447	σὺ δ’ ἐν τόποισι τοῖς ἐμοῖσι μὴ βάλῃς μήθ’ αἱματηρὰς θηγάνας, σπλάγχνων βλάβας νέων, ἀοίνοις ἐμμανεῖς θυμώμασιν, μήτ’, ἐξελοῦσ’ ὡς καρδίαν ἀλεκτόρων, ἐν τοῖς ἐμοῖς ἀστοῖσιν ἱδρύσῃς Ἄρη ἐμφύλιόν τε καὶ πρὸς ἀλλήλους θρασύν.
So do not cast on my realm keen incentives to bloodshed, harmful to young hearts, maddening them with a fury not of wine; and do not, as if taking the heart out of fighting cocks, plant in my people the spirit of tribal war and boldness against each other.

448	θυραῖος ἔστω πόλεμος, οὐ μόλις παρών, ἐν ᾧ τις ἔσται δεινὸς εὐκλείας ἔρως;
Let their war be with foreign enemies, and without stint for one in whom there will be a terrible passion for glory;

449	ἐνοικίου δ’ ὄρνιθος οὐ λέγω μάχην τοιαῦθ’ ἑλέσθαι σοι πάρεστιν ἐξ ἐμοῦ, εὖ δρῶσαν, εὖ πάσχουσαν, εὖ τιμωμένην χώρας μετασχεῖν τῆσδε θεοφιλεστάτης.
but I say there will be no battling of birds within the home. It is possible for you to choose such things from me: bestowing good, receiving good, well honored in this land that is most beloved to the gods.

450	ἐμὲ παθεῖν τάδε, φεῦ, ἐμὲ παλαιόφρονα κατά τε γᾶς οἰκεῖν, φεῦ, ἀτίετον μύσος.
For me to suffer this, alas! For me, with ancient wisdom, to live beneath the earth, alas, without honor, unclean!

451	πνέω τοι μένος ἅπαντά τε κότον.
I am breathing fury and utter rage.

452	οἶ οἶ δᾶ, φεῦ.
Oh, oh the shame of it!

453	τίς μ’ ὑποδύεται, τίς ὀδύνα πλευράς;
What anguish steals into my breast!

454	θυμὸν ἄιε, μᾶτερ Νύξ;
Hear my anger, mother Night;

455	ἀπὸ γάρ με τιμᾶν δαναιᾶν θεῶν δυσπάλαμοι παρ’ οὐδὲν ἦραν δόλοι.
for the deceptions of the gods, hard to fight, have deprived me of my ancient honors, bringing me to nothing.

456	οὔτοι καμοῦμαί σοι λέγουσα τ- ἀγαθά, ὡς μήποτ’ εἴπῃς πρὸς νεωτέρας ἐμοῦ θεὸς παλαιὰ καὶ πολισσούχων βροτῶν ἄτιμος ἔρρειν τοῦδ’ ἀπόξενος πέδου.
No, I will not grow tired of telling you about these good things, so you will never be able to say that you, an ancient goddess, were cast out, dishonored and banished, from this land by me, a younger goddess, and by the mortal guardians of my city.

457	ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν ἁγνόν ἐστί σοι Πειθοῦς σέβας;
But if you give holy reverence to Persuasion, 

458	γλώσσης ἐμῆς μείλιγμα καὶ θελκτήριον, σὺ δ’ οὖν μένοις ἄν;
the sweetness and charm of my tongue, then you might remain.

459	εἰ δὲ μὴ θέλεις μένειν, οὔ τ- ἂν δικαίως τῇδ’ ἐπιρρέποις πόλει μῆνίν τιν’ ἢ κότον τιν’ ἢ βλάβην στρατῷ.
But if you are not willing to stay, then surely it would be unjust for you to inflict on this city any wrath or rage or harm to the people.

460	ἔξεστι γάρ σοι τῆσδε γαμόρῳ χθονὸς εἶναι δικαίως ἐς τὸ πᾶν τιμωμένῃ.
For it is possible for you to have a share of the land justly, with full honors.

461	ἄνασσ’ Ἀθάνα, τίνα με φὴς ἔχειν ἕδραν;
Chorus: Lady Athena, what place do you say I will have?

462	πάσης ἀπήμον’ οἰζύος;
Athena: One free from all pain and distress; accept it.

463	δέχου δὲ σύ.
Chorus: Say that I have accepted it, what honor awaits me?

464	καὶ δὴ δέδεγμαι;
Athena: That no house will flourish without you.

465	τίς δέ μοι τιμὴ μένει;
Chorus: Will you gain for me the possession of such power?

466	ὡς μή τιν’ οἶκον εὐθενεῖν ἄνευ σέθεν.
Athena: Yes, for we will set straight the fortunes of those who worship.

467	σὺ τοῦτο πράξεις, ὥστε με σθένειν τόσον;
Chorus: And will you give me a pledge for all time?

468	τῷ γὰρ σέβοντι συμφορὰς ὀρθώσομεν.
Athena: Yes, for I have no need to say what I will not accomplish.

469	καί μοι πρόπαντος ἐγγύην θήσῃ χρόνου;
Chorus: It seems you will win me by your spells; I am letting go my anger.

470	ἔξεστι γάρ μοι μὴ λέγειν ἃ μὴ τελῶ.
Athena: Then stay in the land and you will gain other friends.

471	θέλξειν μ’ ἔοικας καὶ μεθίσταμαι κότου.
Chorus: What blessings then do you advise me to invoke on this land?

472	τοιγὰρ κατὰ χθόν’ οὖσ’ ἐπικτήσῃ φίλους.
Athena: Blessings that aim at a victory not evil; blessings from the earth and from the waters of the sea and from the heavens: that the breathing gales of wind may approach the land in radiant sunshine, and that the fruit of the earth and offspring of grazing beasts, flourishing in overflow, may not fail my citizens in the course of time, and that the seed of mortals will be kept safe.

473	τί οὖν μ’ ἄνωγας τῇδ’ ἐφυμνῆσαι χθονί;
Chorus: May you make more prosperous the offspring of godly men; for I, like a gardener, cherish the race of these just men, free of sorrow.

474	ὁποῖα νίκης μὴ κακῆς ἐπίσκοπα , καὶ ταῦτα γῆθεν ἔκ τε ποντίας δρόσου ἐξ οὐρανοῦ τε ·
Blessings that aim at a victory not evil; blessings from the earth and from the waters of the sea and from the heavens: 

475	κ- ἀνέμων ἀήματα εὐηλίως πνέοντ’ ἐπιστείχειν χθόνα ·
that the breathing gales of wind may approach the land in radiant sunshine,

476	καρπόν τε γαίας καὶ βοτῶν ἐπίρρυτον ἀστοῖσιν εὐθενοῦντα μὴ κάμνειν χρόνῳ , καὶ τῶν βροτείων σπερμάτων σωτηρίαν .
and that the fruit of the earth and offspring of grazing beasts, flourishing in overflow, may not fail my citizens in the course of time, and that the seed of mortals will be kept safe.

477	τῶν εὐσεβούντων δ’ ἐκφορωτέρα πέλοις .
May you make more prosperous the offspring of godly men;

478	στέργω γάρ , ἀνδρὸς φιτυποίμενος δίκην , τὸ τῶν δικαίων τῶνδ’ ἀπένθητον γένος .
for I, like a gardener, cherish the race of these just men, free of sorrow. Pointing to the audience.

479	τοιαῦτα σ- ἐστι .
Such blessings are yours to give. 

480	τῶν ἀρειφάτων δ’ ἐγὼ πρεπτῶν ἀγώνων οὐκ ἀνέξομαι τὸ μὴ οὐ τήνδ’ ἀστύνικον ἐν βροτοῖς τιμᾶν πόλιν .
I, for my part, will not allow this city to be without honor among mortals,
this city victorious in the glorious contests of deadly war.

483	τάδ’ ἐγὼ προφρόνως τοῖσδε πολίταις πράσσω, μεγάλας καὶ δυσαρέστους δαίμονας αὐτοῦ κατανασσαμένη.
927	Athena: I act zealously for these citizens in this way, installing here among them divinities great and hard to please.

484	πάντα γὰρ αὗται τὰ κατ’ ἀνθρώπους ἔλαχον διέπειν.
For they have been appointed to arrange everything among mortals.

485	ὁ δὲ μὴ κύρσας βαρεῶν τούτων οὐκ οἶδεν ὅθεν πληγαὶ βιότου.
Yet the one who has not found them grievous does not know where the blows of life come from.

486	τὰ γὰρ ἐκ προτέρων ἀπλακήματά νιν πρὸς τάσδ’ ἀπάγει, σιγῶν δ’ ὄλεθρος καὶ μέγα φωνοῦντ’ ἐχθραῖς ὀργαῖς ἀμαθύνει.
For the sins of his fathers drag him before them; destruction, in silence and hateful wrath, levels him to the dust, for all his loud boasting.

487 δενδροπήμων δὲ μὴ πνέοι βλάβα, τὰν ἐμὰν χάριν λέγω;
May no hurtful wind blow to harm the trees—I declare my favor—

488 φλογμός τ’ ὀμματοστερὴς φυτῶν, τὸ μὴ περᾶν ὅρον τόπων, μηδ’ ἄκαρπος αἰανὴς ἐφερπέτω νόσος, μῆλά τ’ εὐθενοῦντα γᾶ ξὺν διπλοῖσιν ἐμβρύοις τρέφοι χρόνῳ τεταγμένῳ;
and may no burning heat, stealing the buds from plants, pass the border of its proper place; may no deadly plague draw near to kill the fruit; may the earth nurture the thriving flocks with twin offspring at the appointed time;

489 γόνος δ’ πλουτόχθων ἑρμαίαν δαιμόνων δόσιν τίοι.
and may the rich produce of the earth always pay the gods’ gift of lucky gain.

490 ἦ τάδ’ ἀκούετε, πόλεως φρούριον, οἷ’ ἐπικραίνει;
Do you hear, guards of my city, the things she will accomplish?

491 μέγα γὰρ δύναται πότνι’ Ἐρινὺς παρά τ’ ἀθανάτοις τοῖς θ’ ὑπὸ γαῖαν, περί τ’ ἀνθρώπων φανερῶς τελέως διαπράσσουσιν, τοῖς μὲν ἀοιδάς, τοῖς δ’ αὖ δακρύων βίον ἀμβλωπὸν παρέχουσαι.
For the lady Erinys is very powerful, both with the deathless gods and with those below the earth; and in their dealings with mankind, they accomplish matters visibly, perfectly; to some giving songs, to others a life made dim by tears.

492 ἀνδροκμῆτας δ’ ἀώρους ἀπεννέπω τύχας, νεανίδων τ’ ἐπηράτων ἀνδροτυχεῖς βιότους δότε, κύρι’ ἔχοντες, θεαί τ’ ὦ Μοῖραι ματροκασιγνῆται, δαίμονες ὀρθονόμοι, παντὶ δόμῳ μετάκοινοι, παντὶ χρόνῳ δ’ ἐπιβριθεῖς ἐνδίκοις ὁμιλίαις, πάντᾳ τιμιώταται θεῶν.
I forbid deadly and untimely fate for men; grant to lovely maidens life with a husband, you that have the rightful power; you, divine Fates, our sisters by one mother, divinities who distribute justly, who have a share in every home, and whose righteous visitations press heavily at every season, most honored everywhere among the gods!

497	τὰν δ’ ἄπληστον κακῶν μήποτ’ ἐν πόλει στάσιν τᾷδ’ ἐπεύχομαι βρέμειν.
976	Chorus: I pray that discord, greedy for evil, may never clamor in this city,

498	μηδὲ πιοῦσα κόνις μέλαν αἷμα πολιτᾶν δι’ ὀργὰν ποινᾶς ἀντιφόνους ἄτας ἁρπαλίσαι πόλεως.
and may the dust not drink the black blood of its people and through passion cause ruinous murder for vengeance to the destruction of the state.

499	χάρματα δ’ ἀντιδιδοῖεν κοινοφιλεῖ διανοίᾳ, καὶ στυγεῖν μιᾷ φρενί;
But may they return joy for joy in a spirit of common love, and may they hate with one mind;

500	πολλῶν γὰρ τόδ’ ἐν βροτοῖς ἄκος.
for this is the cure of many an evil in the world.

501 ἆρα φρονοῦσιν γλώσσης ἀγαθῆς ὁδὸν εὑρίσκειν ;
Do they not then intend to find the path of good speech?

502 ἐκ τῶν φοβερῶν τῶνδε προσώπων μέγα κέρδος ὁρῶ τοῖσδε πολίταις ·
From these terrible faces I see great profit for these citizens;

503 τάσδε γὰρ εὔφρονας εὔφρονες αἰεὶ μέγα τιμῶντες καὶ γῆν καὶ πόλιν ὀρθοδίκαιον πρέψετε πάντως διάγοντες .
for, if you always greatly honor with kindness the kindly ones, you will surely be pre-eminent, keeping your land and city in the straight path of justice.

504 χαίρετε χαίρετ’ ἐν αἰσιμίαισι πλούτου .
Farewell, farewell, in the wealth allotted to you by fate.

505 χαίρετ’ ἀστικὸς λεώς , ἴκταρ ἥμενοι Διός , παρθένου φίλας φίλοι σωφρονοῦντες ἐν χρόνῳ .
Farewell, people of the city, seated near to Zeus, the beloved of the beloved maiden, learning at last the way of wisdom.

506 Παλλάδος δ’ ὑπὸ πτεροῖς ὄντας ἅζ

εται πατήρ.
The Father stands in awe of you, since you are under Pallas’ wings.

507 χαίρετε κ- ὑμεῖς ·
Farewell to you also;

508 προτέραν δ’ ἐμὲ χρὴ στείχειν θαλάμους ἀποδείξουσαν πρὸς φῶς ἱερὸν τῶνδε προπομπῶν .
but I must lead the way to show you your dwellings by the sacred light of these, your escorts.

509 ἴτε καὶ σφαγίων τῶνδ’ ὑπὸ σεμνῶν κατὰ γῆς σύμεναι τὸ μὲν ἀτηρὸν χώρας κατέχειν , τὸ δὲ κερδαλέον πέμπειν πόλεως ἐπὶ νίκῃ .
Go, and, speeding beneath the earth with these solemn sacrifices, hold back what is ruinous to the land, but send what is profitable for the city to win her victory.

510 ὑμεῖς δ’ ἡγεῖσθε , πολισσοῦχοι παῖδες Κραναοῦ , ταῖσδε μετοίκοις .
You who hold the city, children of Cranaus, lead on their way these new dwellers here.

511 εἴη δ’ ἀγαθῶν ἀγαθὴ διάνοια πολίταις.
May there be good will in the citizens in return for good done to them!

512 χαίρετε, χαίρετε δ’ αὖθις, ἐπανδιπλάζω,
Farewell, farewell, again, I repeat,

πάντες οἱ κατὰ πτόλιν, δαίμονές τε καὶ βροτοί, Παλλάδος πόλιν νέμοντες;
all you in the city, both gods and mortals, living in Pallas’ city;

513 μετοικίαν δ’ ἐμὴν εὖ σέβοντες οὔτι μέμψεσθε συμφορὰς βίου.
if you duly revere my residence among you, you will not blame the chances of life.

514	αἰνῶ τε μύθους τῶνδε τῶν κατευγμάτων πέμψω τε φέγγει λαμπάδων σελασφόρων εἰς τοὺς ἔνερθε καὶ κατὰ χθονὸς τόπους ξὺν προσπόλοισιν, αἵτε φρουροῦσιν βρέτας τ- ἐμὸν δικαίως.
I approve the words of your invocation, and will escort you by the light of gleaming torches to the places below and beneath the earth, with the attendant women who guard my image in duty bound.

515	ὄμμα γὰρ πάσης χθονὸς Θησῇδος ἐξίκοιτ’ ἂν εὐκλεὴς λόχος παίδων, γυναικῶν, καὶ στόλος πρεσβυτίδων.
For the eye of the whole land of Theseus will come forth, a glorious troop of children, matrons and a band of old women.

516	φοινικοβάπτοις ἐνδυτοῖς ἐσθήμασι τιμᾶτε, καὶ τὸ φέγγος ὁρμάσθω πυρός, ὅπως ἂν εὔφρων ἥδ’ ὁμιλία χθονὸς τὸ λοιπὸν εὐάνδροισι συμφοραῖς πρέπῃ.
Dress them honorably in robes dyed scarlet, and let the torches' light move on, so that this kindly company of visitors to our land may show itself afterwards in blessings that bring prosperity to men.

517	βᾶτε δόμῳ,

μεγάλαι φιλότιμοι Νυκτὸς παῖδες ἄπαιδες, ὑπ' εὔφρονι πομπᾷ,
Go on your way to your home, children of Night: mighty, lovers of honor, children, yet aged, under kindly escort—

518	εὐφαμεῖτε δέ, χωρῖται, γᾶς ὑπὸ κεύθεσιν ὠγυγίοισιν, καὶ τιμαῖς καὶ θυσίαις περίσεπτα τυχοῦσαι, εὐφαμεῖτε δὲ πανδαμεί.
you who dwell in the land, refrain from inauspicious speech! Under the primeval caverns of

the earth, gaining the high honor of worship and sacrifice—all you people, refrain from inauspicious speech!

519	ἵλαοι δὲ καὶ σύμφρονες γᾷ δεῦρ' ἴτε, σεμναί, ξὺν πυριδάπτῳ λαμπάδι τερπόμεναι καθ' ὁδόν.
Gracious and favorable to the land, come here, venerable goddesses, with flame-fed torch, rejoicing as you go—

520	ὀλολύξατε νῦν ἐπὶ μολπαῖς.
cry aloud now in echo to our song!

521	σπονδαὶ δ’ ἐς τὸ πᾶν ἐκ μετοίκων Παλλάδος ἀστοῖς.
Peace endures for all time between Pallas’ citizens and these new dwellers here.

522	Ζεὺς ὁ πανόπτας οὕτω Μοῖρά τε συγκατέβα.
Zeus who sees all and Fate have come down to lend aid—

523	ὀλολύξατε νῦν ἐπὶ μολπαῖς.
cry aloud now in echo to our song!


