
Prompt: Intersperse for each Greek sentence the corresponding section of the translation. Remove TEI XML tags (and remove TEI XML <note/> content.) You will often have to split English sentences into smaller parts to line up Greek and English. Never change the Greek sentence breaks. Make the English fit the Greek. Do not add extra quotes around the English. Make sure you use the Greek sentence numbers listed for each sentence. Do not place extra quotes around the English. Do not generate new translations yourself! Keep the translation for each Greek sentence on a single line. Place the sentence number followed by a tab and the Greek on one line with the English on the next line. Again, do not add extra "" around the English! And do the whole job -- do not stop and wait to be prompted to finish!
 

1	πολλάκις ἐθαύμασα τίσι ποτὲ λόγοις Ἀθηναίους ἔπεισαν οἱ γραψάμενοι Σωκράτην ὡς ἄξιος εἴη θανάτου τῇ πόλει .
I have often wondered by what arguments those who drew up the indictment against Socrates could persuade the Athenians that his life was forfeit to the state.

2	ἡ μὲν γὰρ γραφὴ κατ’ αὐτοῦ τοιάδε τις ἦν ·
The indictment against him was to this effect:

3	ἀδικεῖ Σωκράτης οὓς μὲν ἡ πόλις νομίζει θεοὺς οὐ νομίζων , ἕτερα δὲ καινὰ δαιμόνια εἰσφέρων ·
Socrates is guilty of rejecting the gods acknowledged by the state and of bringing in strange deities:

4	ἀδικεῖ δὲ καὶ τοὺς νέους διαφθείρων .
he is also guilty of corrupting the youth.

5	πρῶτον μὲν οὖν , ὡς οὐκ ἐνόμιζεν οὓς ἡ πόλις νομίζει θεούς , ποίῳ ποτ’ ἐχρήσαντο τεκμηρίῳ ;
First then, that he rejected the gods acknowledged by the state — what evidence did they produce of that?

6	θύων τε γὰρ φανερὸς ἦν πολλάκις μὲν οἴκοι , πολλάκις δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν κοινῶν τῆς πόλεως βωμῶν , καὶ μαντικῇ χρώμενος οὐκ ἀφανὴς ἦν .
He offered sacrifices constantly, and made no secret of it, now in his home, now at the altars of the state temples, and he made use of divination with as little secrecy.

7	διετεθρύλητο γὰρ ὡς φαίη Σωκράτης τὸ δαιμόνιον ἑαυτῷ σημαίνειν ·
Indeed it had become notorious that Socrates claimed to be guided by the deity:

8	ὅθεν δὴ καὶ μάλιστά μοι δοκοῦσιν αὐτὸν αἰτιάσασθαι καινὰ δαιμόνια εἰσφέρειν .
it was out of this claim, I think, that the charge of bringing in strange deities arose.

9	ὁ δ’ οὐδὲν καινότερον εἰσέφερε τῶν ἄλλων , ὅσοι μαντικὴν νομίζοντες οἰωνοῖς τε χρῶνται καὶ φήμαις καὶ συμβόλοις καὶ θυσίαις .
He was no more bringing in anything strange than are other believers in divination, who rely on augury, oracles, coincidences, and sacrifices.

10	οὗτοί τε γὰρ ὑπολαμβάνουσιν οὐ τοὺς ὄρνιθας οὐδὲ τοὺς ἀπαντῶντας εἰδέναι τὰ συμφέροντα τοῖς μαντευομένοις , ἀλλὰ τοὺς θεοὺς διὰ τούτων αὐτὰ σημαίνειν , κ- ἐκεῖνος δὲ οὕτως ἐνόμιζεν .
For these men’s belief is not that the birds or the folk met by accident know what profits the inquirer, but that they are the instruments by which the gods make this known; and that was Socrates’ belief too.

11	ἀλλ’ οἱ μὲν πλεῖστοί φασιν ὑπό τε τῶν ὀρνίθων καὶ τῶν ἀπαντώντων ἀποτρέπεσθαί τε καὶ προτρέπεσθαι ·
But most people say they are deterred or encouraged by birds and chance meetings;

12	Σωκράτης δ’ ὥσπερ ἐγίγνωσκεν , οὕτως ἔλεγε ·
Socrates, however, spoke as he believed;

13	τὸ δαιμόνιον γὰρ ἔφη σημαίνειν .
for he said that his divine sign indicated to him.

14	καὶ πολλοῖς τῶν συνόντων προηγόρευε τὰ μὲν ποιεῖν , τὰ δὲ μὴ ποιεῖν , ὡς τοῦ δαιμονίου προσημαίνοντος ·
And to many of those who were with him, he foretold what they should or should not do, as the divine sign indicated;

15	καὶ τοῖς μὲν πειθομένοις αὐτῷ συνέφερε , τοῖς δὲ μὴ πειθομένοις μετέμελε .
and to those who obeyed him it turned out well, to those who did not, it was a matter of regret.

16	καίτοι τίς οὐκ ἂν ὁμολογήσειεν αὐτὸν βούλεσθαι μήτ’ ἠλίθιον μήτ’ ἀλαζόνα φαίνεσθαι τοῖς συνοῦσιν ;
And who would not admit that he would not wish to appear either foolish or boastful to those with him?

17	ἐδόκει δ’ ἂν ἀμφότερα ταῦτα , εἰ προαγορεύων ὡς ὑπὸ θεοῦ φαινόμενα καὶ ψευδόμενος ἐφαίνετο .
Yet he would have seemed to be both if, predicting as though by a god's revelation, he was found to be lying.

18	δῆλον οὖν ὅτι οὐκ ἂν προέλεγεν , εἰ μὴ ἐπίστευεν ἀληθεύσειν .
It is clear, therefore, that he would not have foretold if he had not believed he spoke the truth.

19	ταῦτα δὲ τίς ἂν ἄλλῳ πιστεύσειεν ἢ θεῷ ;
And who would believe this of anyone else but a god?

20	πιστεύων δὲ θεοῖς πῶς οὐκ εἶναι θεοὺς ἐνόμιζεν ;
And believing in gods, how could he think that there were no gods?

21	ἀλλὰ μὴν ἐποίει καὶ τάδε πρὸς τοὺς ἐπιτηδείους .
Moreover, he did the following also with those who were suitable.

22	τὰ μὲν γὰρ ἀναγκαῖα συνεβούλευε καὶ πράττειν ὡς ἐνόμιζεν ἄριστ’ ἂν πραχθῆναι ·
For the necessary things he advised and acted as he believed they would be best done;

23	περὶ δὲ τῶν ἀδήλων ὅπως ἀποβήσοιτο μαντευσομένους ἔπεμπεν , εἰ ποιητέα .
but for the uncertain outcomes, he sent those who were divining, to inquire whether they should be done.

24	καὶ τοὺς μέλλοντας οἴκους τε καὶ πόλεις καλῶς οἰκήσειν μαντικῆς ἔφη προσδεῖσθαι ·
Those who intended to control a house or a city, he said, needed the help of divination.

25	τεκτονικὸν μὲν γὰρ ἢ χαλκευτικὸν ἢ γεωργικὸν ἢ ἀνθρώπων ἀρχικὸν ἢ τῶν τοιούτων ἔργων ἐξεταστικὸν ἢ λογιστικὸν ἢ οἰκονομικὸν ἢ στρατηγικὸν γενέσθαι , πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα μαθήματα καὶ ἀνθρώπου γνώμῃ αἱρετὰ ἐνόμιζεν εἶναι ·
For the craft of carpenter, smith, farmer or ruler, and the theory of such crafts, and arithmetic and economics and generalship might be learned and mastered by the application of human powers.

26	τὰ δὲ μέγιστα τῶν ἐν τούτοις ἔφη τοὺς θεοὺς ἑαυτοῖς καταλείπεσθαι , ὧν οὐδὲν δῆλον εἶναι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις .
But the deepest secrets of these matters the gods reserved to themselves; they were dark to men.

27	οὔτε γὰρ τῷ καλῶς ἀγρὸν φυτευσαμένῳ δῆλον ὅστις καρπώσεται , οὔτε τῷ καλῶς οἰκίαν οἰκοδομησαμένῳ δῆλον ὅστις ἐνοικήσει , οὔτε τῷ στρατηγικῷ δῆλον εἰ συμφέρει στρατηγεῖν , οὔτε τῷ πολιτικῷ δῆλον εἰ συμφέρει τῆς πόλεως προστατεῖν , οὔτε τῷ καλὴν γήμαντι , ἵν’ εὐφραίνηται , δῆλον εἰ διὰ ταύτην ἀνιάσεται , οὔτε τῷ δυνατοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει κηδεστὰς λαβόντι δῆλον εἰ διὰ τούτους στερήσεται τῆς πόλεως .
You may plant a field well; but you know not who shall gather the fruits: you may build a house well; but you know not who shall dwell in it: able to command, you cannot know whether it is profitable to command: versed in statecraft, you know not whether it is profitable to guide the state: though, for your delight, you marry a pretty woman, you cannot tell whether she will bring you sorrow: though you form a party among men mighty in the state, you know not whether they will cause you to be driven from the state.

28	τοὺς δὲ μηδὲν τῶν τοιούτων οἰομένους εἶναι δαιμόνιον , ἀλλὰ πάντα τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης γνώμης , δαιμονᾶν ἔφη ·
If any man thinks that these matters are wholly within the grasp of the human mind and nothing in them is beyond our reason, that man, he said, is irrational.

29	δαιμονᾶν δὲ καὶ τοὺς μαντευομένους ἃ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἔδωκαν οἱ θεοὶ μαθοῦσι διακρίνειν ( οἷον εἴ τις ἐπερωτῴη πότερον ἐπιστάμενον ἡνιοχεῖν ἐπὶ ζεῦγος λαβεῖν κρεῖττον ἢ μὴ ἐπιστάμενον , ἢ πότερον ἐπιστάμενον κυβερνᾶν ἐπὶ τὴν ναῦν κρεῖττον λαβεῖν ἢ μὴ ἐπιστάμενον ) , ἢ ἃ ἔξεστιν ἀριθμήσαντας ἢ μετρήσαντας ἢ στήσαντας εἰδέναι ·
But it is no less irrational to seek the guidance of heaven in matters which men are permitted by the gods to decide for themselves by study.

30	τοὺς τὰ τοιαῦτα παρὰ τῶν θεῶν πυνθανομένους ἀθέμιτα ποιεῖν ἡγεῖτο .
To put such questions to the gods seemed to his mind profane.

31	ἔφη δὲ δεῖν , ἃ μὲν μαθόντας ποιεῖν ἔδωκαν οἱ θεοί , μανθάνειν , ἃ δὲ μὴ δῆλα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐστί , πειρᾶσθαι διὰ μαντικῆς παρὰ τῶν θεῶν πυνθάνεσθαι ·
In short, what the gods have granted us to do by help of learning, we must learn; what is hidden from mortals we should try to find out from the gods by divination: for to him that is in their grace the gods grant a sign.

32	τοὺς θεοὺς γὰρ οἷς ἂν ὦσιν ἵλεῳ σημαίνειν .
Moreover, Socrates lived ever in the open.

33	ἀλλὰ μὴν ἐκεῖνός γε ἀεὶ μὲν ἦν ἐν τῷ φανερῷ ·
For early in the morning he went to the public promenades and training-grounds.

34	πρῴ τε γὰρ εἰς τοὺς περιπάτους καὶ τὰ γυμνάσια ᾔει καὶ πληθούσης ἀγορᾶς ἐκεῖ φανερὸς ἦν , καὶ τὸ λοιπὸν ἀεὶ τῆς ἡμέρας ἦν ὅπου πλείστοις μέλλοι συνέσεσθαι ·
In the forenoon he was seen in the market. And the rest of the day he passed just where most people were to be met:

35	καὶ ἔλεγε μὲν ὡς τὸ πολύ , τοῖς δὲ βουλομένοις ἐξῆν ἀκούειν .
And the rest of the day he passed just where most people were to be met: he was generally talking, and anyone might listen.

36	οὐδεὶς δὲ πώποτε Σωκράτους οὐδὲν ἀσεβὲς οὐδὲ ἀνόσιον οὔτε πράττοντος εἶδεν οὔτε λέγοντος ἤκουσεν .
Yet none ever knew him to offend against piety and religion in deed or word.

37	οὐδὲ γὰρ περὶ τῆς τῶν πάντων φύσεως , ᾗπερ τῶν ἄλλων οἱ πλεῖστοι , διελέγετο σκοπῶν ὅπως ὁ καλούμενος ὑπὸ τῶν σοφιστῶν κόσμος ἔχει καὶ τίσιν ἀνάγκαις ἕκαστα γίγνεται τῶν οὐρανίων , ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς φροντίζοντας τὰ τοιαῦτα μωραίνοντας ἀπεδείκνυε .
He did not even discuss that topic so favoured by other talkers, "the Nature of the Universe": and avoided speculation on the so-called "Cosmos" of the Professors, how it works, and on the laws that govern the phenomena of the heavens: indeed he would argue that to trouble one’s mind with such problems is sheer folly.

38	καὶ πρῶτον μὲν αὐτῶν ἐσκόπει πότερά ποτε νομίσαντες ἱκανῶς ἤδη τ- ἀνθρώπινα εἰδέναι ἔρχονται ἐπὶ τὸ περὶ τῶν τοιούτων φροντίζειν , ἢ τὰ μὲν ἀνθρώπινα παρέντες , τὰ δαιμόνια δὲ σκοποῦντες ἡγοῦνται τὰ προσήκοντα πράττειν .
In the first place, he would inquire, did these thinkers suppose that their knowledge of human affairs was so complete that they must seek these new fields for the exercise of their brains; or that it was their duty to neglect human affairs and consider only things divine?

39	ἐθαύμαζε δ’ εἰ μὴ φανερὸν αὐτοῖς ἐστιν , ὅτι ταῦτα οὐ δυνατόν ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις εὑρεῖν ·
Moreover, he marvelled at their blindness in not seeing that man cannot solve these riddles; since even the most conceited talkers on these problems did not agree in their theories, but behaved to one another like madmen.

40	ἐπεὶ καὶ τοὺς μέγιστον φρονοῦντας ἐπὶ τῷ περὶ τούτων λέγειν οὐ τ- αὐτὰ δοξάζειν ἀλλήλοις , ἀλλὰ τοῖς μαινομένοις ὁμοίως διακεῖσθαι πρὸς ἀλλήλους .
As some madmen have no fear of danger and others are afraid where there is nothing to be afraid of, as some will do or say anything in a crowd with no sense of shame, while others shrink even from going abroad among men, some respect neither temple nor altar nor any other sacred thing, others worship stocks and stones and beasts, so is it, he held, with those who worry with "Universal Nature."

41	τῶν τε γὰρ μαινομένων τοὺς μὲν οὐδὲ τὰ δεινὰ δεδιέναι , τοὺς δὲ καὶ τὰ μὴ φοβερὰ φοβεῖσθαι , καὶ τοῖς μὲν οὐδ’ ἐν ὄχλῳ δοκεῖν αἰσχρὸν εἶναι λέγειν ἢ ποιεῖν ὁτιοῦν , τοῖς δὲ οὐδ’ ἐξιτητέον εἰς ἀνθρώπους εἶναι δοκεῖν , καὶ τοὺς μὲν οὔθ’ ἱερὸν οὔτε βωμὸν οὔτ’ ἄλλο τῶν θείων οὐδὲν τιμᾶν , τοὺς δὲ καὶ λίθους καὶ ξύλα τὰ τυχόντα καὶ θηρία σέβεσθαι ·
Some hold that "What is" is one, others that it is infinite in number: some that all things are in perpetual motion, others that nothing can ever be moved at any time: some that all life is birth and decay, others that nothing can ever be born or ever die.

42	τῶν τε περὶ τῆς τῶν πάντων φύσεως μεριμνώντων τοῖς μὲν δοκεῖν ἓν μόνον τὸ ὂν εἶναι , τοῖς δ’ ἄπειρα τὸ πλῆθος , καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἀεὶ πάντα κινεῖσθαι , τοῖς δ’ οὐδὲν ἄν ποτε κινηθῆναι , καὶ τοῖς μὲν πάντα γίγνεσθαί τε καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι , τοῖς δὲ οὔτ’ ἂν γενέσθαι ποτὲ οὐδὲν οὔτε ἀπολεῖσθαι .
Nor were those the only questions he asked about such theorists. Students of human nature, he said, think that they will apply their knowledge in due course for the good of themselves and any others they choose.

43	ἐσκόπει δὲ περὶ αὐτῶν καὶ τάδε , ἆρ’ , ὥσπερ οἱ τ- ἀνθρώπεια μανθάνοντες ἡγοῦνται τοῦθ’ ὅ τι ἂν μάθωσιν ἑαυτοῖς τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅτῳ ἂν βούλωνται ποιήσειν , οὕτω καὶ οἱ τὰ θεῖα ζητοῦντες νομίζουσιν , ἐπειδὰν γνῶσιν αἷς ἀνάγκαις ἕκαστα γίγνεται , ποιήσειν , ὅταν βούλωνται , καὶ ἀνέμους καὶ ὕδατα καὶ ὥρας καὶ ὅτου ἂν ἄλλου δέωνται τῶν τοιούτων , ἢ τοιοῦτον μὲν οὐδὲν οὐδ’ ἐλπίζουσιν , ἀρκεῖ δ’ αὐτοῖς γνῶναι μόνον ᾗ τῶν τοιούτων ἕκαστα γίγνεται .
Do those who pry into heavenly phenomena imagine that, once they have discovered the laws by which these are produced, they will create at their will winds, waters, seasons and such things to their need? Or have they no such expectation, and are they satisfied with knowing the causes of these various phenomena?

44	περὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν ταῦτα πραγματευομένων τοιαῦτα ἔλεγεν ·
Such, then, was his criticism of those who meddle with these matters. His own conversation was ever of human things.

45	αὐτὸς δὲ περὶ τῶν ἀνθρωπείων ἀεὶ διελέγετο σκοπῶν τί εὐσεβές , τί ἀσεβές , τί καλόν , τί αἰσχρόν , τί δίκαιον , τί ἄδικον , τί σωφροσύνη , τί μανία , τί ἀνδρεία , τί δειλία , τί πόλις , τί πολιτικός , τί ἀρχὴ ἀνθρώπων , τί ἀρχικὸς ἀνθρώπων , καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων , ἃ τοὺς μὲν εἰδότας ἡγεῖτο καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς εἶναι , τοὺς δ’ ἀγνοοῦντας ἀνδραποδώδεις ἂν δικαίως κεκλῆσθαι .
The problems he discussed were, What is godly, what is ungodly; what is beautiful, what is ugly; what is just, what is unjust; what is prudence, what is madness; what is courage, what is cowardice; what is a state, what is a statesman; what is government, and what is a governor.

46	ὅσα μὲν οὖν μὴ φανερὸς ἦν ὅπως ἐγίγνωσκεν , οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν ὑπὲρ τούτων περὶ αὐτοῦ παραγνῶναι τοὺς δικαστάς ·
So, in pronouncing on opinions of his that were unknown to them it is not surprising that the jury erred.

47	ὅσα δὲ πάντες ᾔδεσαν , οὐ θαυμαστὸν εἰ μὴ τούτων ἐνεθυμήθησαν ;
But is it not astonishing that they should have ignored matters of common knowledge?

48	βουλεύσας γάρ ποτε καὶ τὸν βουλευτικὸν ὅρκον ὀμόσας , ἐν ᾧ ἦν κατὰ τοὺς νόμους βουλεύσειν , ἐπιστάτης ἐν τῷ δήμῳ γενόμενος , ἐπιθυμήσαντος τοῦ δήμου παρὰ τοὺς νόμους ἐννέα στρατηγοὺς μιᾷ ψήφῳ τοὺς ἀμφὶ Θράσυλλον καὶ Ἐρασινίδην ἀποκτεῖναι πάντας , οὐκ ἠθέλησεν ἐπιψηφίσαι , ὀργιζομένου μὲν αὐτῷ τοῦ δήμου , πολλῶν δὲ καὶ δυνατῶν ἀπειλούντων ·
For instance, when he was on the Council and had taken the counsellor’s oath by which he bound himself to give counsel in accordance with the laws, it fell to his lot to preside in the Assembly when the people wanted to condemn Thrasyllus and Erasinides and their colleagues to death by a single vote.

49	ἀλλὰ περὶ πλείονος ἐποιήσατο εὐορκεῖν ἢ χαρίσασθαι τῷ δήμῳ παρὰ τὸ δίκαιον καὶ φυλάξασθαι τοὺς ἀπειλοῦντας .
That was illegal, and he refused the motion in spite of popular rancour and the threats of many powerful persons.

50	καὶ γὰρ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι θεοὺς ἐνόμιζεν ἀνθρώπων οὐχ ὃν τρόπον οἱ πολλοὶ νομίζουσιν ·
For, like most men, indeed, he believed that the gods are heedful of mankind.

51	οὗτοι μὲν γὰρ οἴονται τοὺς θεοὺς τὰ μὲν εἰδέναι , τὰ δ’ οὐκ εἰδέναι ·
But with an important difference; for whereas they do not believe in the omniscience of the gods.

52	Σωκράτης δὲ πάντα μὲν ἡγεῖτο θεοὺς εἰδέναι , τά τε λεγόμενα καὶ πραττόμενα καὶ τὰ σιγῇ βουλευόμενα , πανταχοῦ δὲ παρεῖναι καὶ σημαίνειν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις περὶ τῶν ἀνθρωπείων πάντων .
Socrates thought that they know all things, our words and deeds and secret purposes; that they are present everywhere, and grant signs to men of all that concerns man.

53	θαυμάζω οὖν ὅπως ποτὲ ἐπείσθησαν Ἀθηναῖοι Σωκράτην περὶ θεοὺς μὴ σωφρονεῖν , τὸν ἀσεβὲς μὲν οὐδέν ποτε περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς οὔτ’ εἰπόντα οὔτε πράξαντα , τοιαῦτα δὲ καὶ λέγοντα καὶ πράττοντα περὶ θεῶν οἷά τις ἂν καὶ λέγων καὶ πράττων εἴη τε καὶ νομίζοιτο εὐσεβέστατος .
I wonder, then, how the Athenians can have been persuaded that Socrates was a freethinker, when he never said or did anything contrary to sound religion, and his utterances about the gods and his behaviour towards them were the words and actions of a man who is truly religious and deserves to be thought so.

54	θαυμαστὸν δὲ φαίνεταί μοι καὶ τὸ πεισθῆναί τινας ὡς Σωκράτης τοὺς νέους διέφθειρεν , ὃς πρὸς τοῖς εἰρημένοις πρῶτον μὲν ἀφροδισίων καὶ γαστρὸς πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἐγκρατέστατος ἦν , εἶτα πρὸς χειμῶνα καὶ θέρος καὶ πάντας πόνους καρτερικώτατος , ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τὸ μετρίων δεῖσθαι πεπαιδευμένος οὕτως , ὥστε πάνυ μικρὰ κεκτημένος πάνυ ῥᾳδίως ἔχειν ἀρκοῦντα .
It is astonishing that some were persuaded that Socrates corrupted the young, who was the most self-controlled of all men in matters of sex and appetite, the most enduring in winter and summer and all kinds of labours, and so trained himself to need very little, that what little he had was always sufficient.

55	πῶς οὖν αὐτὸς ὢν τοιοῦτος ἄλλους ἂν ἢ ἀσεβεῖς ἢ παρανόμους ἢ λίχνους ἢ ἀφροδισίων ἀκρατεῖς ἢ πρὸς τὸ πονεῖν μαλακοὺς ἐποίησεν ;
No less wonderful is it to me that some believed the charge brought against Socrates of corrupting the youth.

56	ἀλλ’ ἔπαυσε μὲν τούτων πολλοὺς ἀρετῆς ποιήσας ἐπιθυμεῖν καὶ ἐλπίδας παρασχών , ἂν ἑαυτῶν ἐπιμελῶνται , καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς ἔσεσθαι ·
On the contrary, he cured these vices in many, by putting into them a desire for goodness, and by giving them confidence that self-discipline would make them gentlemen.

57	καίτοι γε οὐδεπώποτε ὑπέσχετο διδάσκαλος εἶναι τούτου , ἀλλὰ τῷ φανερὸς εἶναι τοιοῦτος ὢν ἐλπίζειν ἐποίει τοὺς συνδιατρίβοντας ἑαυτῷ μιμουμένους ἐκεῖνον τοιούτους γενήσεσθαι .
To be sure he never professed to teach this; but, by letting his own light shine, he led his disciples to hope that they through imitation of him would attain to such excellence.

58	ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τοῦ σώματος αὐτός τε οὐκ ἠμέλει τούς τ’ ἀμελοῦντας οὐκ ἐπῄνει ·
Furthermore, he himself never neglected the body, and reproved such neglect in others.

59	τὸ μὲν οὖν ὑπερεσθίοντα ὑπερπονεῖν ἀπεδοκίμαζε , τὸ δὲ ὅσα ἡδέως ἡ ψυχὴ δέχεται , ταῦτα ἱκανῶς ἐκπονεῖν ἐδοκίμαζε ·
Thus over-eating followed by over-exertion he disapproved. But he approved of taking as much hard exercise as is agreeable to the soul.

60	ταύτην γὰρ τὴν ἕξιν ὑγιεινήν τε ἱκανῶς εἶναι καὶ τὴν τῆς ψυχῆς ἐπιμέλειαν οὐκ ἐμποδίζειν ἔφη .
For the habit not only insured good health, but did not hamper the care of the soul.

61	ἀλλ’ οὐ μὴν θρυπτικός γε οὐδὲ ἀλαζονικὸς ἦν οὔτ’ ἀμπεχόνῃ οὔθ’ ὑποδέσει οὔτε τῇ ἄλλῃ διαίτῃ .
On the other hand, he disliked foppery and pretentiousness in the fashion of clothes or shoes or in behaviour.

62	οὐ μὴν οὐδ’ ἐρασιχρημάτους γε τοὺς συνόντας ἐποίει .
Nor, again, did he encourage love of money in his companions.

63	τῶν μὲν γὰρ ἄλλων ἐπιθυμιῶν ἔπαυε , τοὺς δ’ ἑαυτοῦ ἐπιθυμοῦντας οὐκ ἐπράττετο χρήματα .
For while he checked their other desires, he would not make money himself out of their desire for his companionship.

64	τούτου δ’ ἀπεχόμενος ἐνόμιζεν ἐλευθερίας ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ·
He held that this self-denying ordinance insured his liberty.

65	τοὺς δὲ λαμβάνοντας τῆς ὁμιλίας μισθὸν ἀνδραποδιστὰς ἑαυτῶν ἀπεκάλει διὰ τὸ ἀναγκαῖον αὐτοῖς εἶναι διαλέγεσθαι παρ’ ὧν ἂν λάβοιεν τὸν μισθόν .
Those who charged a fee for their society he denounced for selling themselves into bondage; since they were bound to converse with all from whom they took the fee.

66	ἐθαύμαζε δ’ εἴ τις ἀρετὴν ἐπαγγελλόμενος ἀργύριον πράττοιτο καὶ μὴ νομίζοι τὸ μέγιστον κέρδος ἕξειν φίλον ἀγαθὸν κτησάμενος , ἀλλὰ φοβοῖτο μὴ ὁ γενόμενος καλὸς κ- ἀγαθὸς τῷ τὰ μέγιστα εὐεργετήσαντι μὴ τὴν μεγίστην χάριν ἕξοι .
He marvelled that anyone should make money by the profession of virtue, and should not reflect that his highest reward would be the gain of a good friend.

67	Σωκράτης δὲ ἐπηγγείλατο μὲν οὐδενὶ πώποτε τοιοῦτον οὐδέν , ἐπίστευε δὲ τῶν συνόντων ἑαυτῷ τοὺς ἀποδεξαμένους ἅπερ αὐτὸς ἐδοκίμαζεν εἰς τὸν πάντα βίον ἑαυτῷ τε καὶ ἀλλήλοις φίλους ἀγαθοὺς ἔσεσθαι .
Socrates indeed never promised any such boon to anyone; but he was confident that those of his companions who adopted his principles of conduct would throughout life be good friends to him and to one another.

68	πῶς ἂν οὖν ὁ τοιοῦτος ἀνὴρ διαφθείροι τοὺς νέους ;
How, then, should such a man "corrupt the youth"? 

69	εἰ μὴ ἄρα ἡ τῆς ἀρετῆς ἐπιμέλεια διαφθορά ἐστιν .
Unless, perchance, it be corruption to foster virtue. But, said his accuser, he taught his companions to despise the established laws by insisting on the folly of appointing public officials by lot.

70	ἀλλὰ νὴ Δία , ὁ κατήγορος ἔφη , ὑπερορᾶν ἐποίει τῶν καθεστώτων νόμων τοὺς συνόντας , λέγων ὡς μῶρον εἴη τοὺς μὲν τῆς πόλεως ἄρχοντας ἀπὸ κυάμου καθιστάναι , κυβερνήτῃ δὲ μηδένα θέλειν χρῆσθαι κυαμευτῷ μηδὲ τέκτονι μηδ’ αὐλητῇ μηδ’ ἐπ’ ἄλλα τοιαῦτα , ἃ πολλῷ ἐλάττονας βλάβας ἁμαρτανόμενα ποιεῖ τῶν περὶ τὴν πόλιν ἁμαρτανομένων ·
Such sayings, he argued, led the young to despise the established constitution and made them violent.

71	τοὺς δὲ τοιούτους λόγους ἐπαίρειν ἔφη τοὺς νέους καταφρονεῖν τῆς καθεστώσης πολιτείας καὶ ποιεῖν βιαίους .
But I hold that they who cultivate wisdom and think they will be able to guide the people in prudent policy never lapse into violence.

72	ἐγὼ δ’ οἶμαι τοὺς φρόνησιν ἀσκοῦντας καὶ νομίζοντας ἱκανοὺς ἔσεσθαι τὰ συμφέροντα διδάσκειν τοὺς πολίτας ἥκιστα γίγνεσθαι βιαίους , εἰδότας ὅτι τῇ μὲν βίᾳ πρόσεισιν ἔχθραι καὶ κίνδυνοι , διὰ δὲ τοῦ πείθειν ἀκινδύνως τε καὶ μετὰ φιλίας τ- αὐτὰ γίγνεται .
They know that enmities and dangers are inseparable from violence, but persuasion produces the same results safely and amicably.

73	οἱ μὲν γὰρ βιασθέντες ὡς ἀφαιρεθέντες μισοῦσιν , οἱ δὲ πεισθέντες ὡς κεχαρισμένοι φιλοῦσιν .
For violence, by making its victims sensible of loss, rouses their hatred: but persuasion, by seeming to confer a favour, wins goodwill.

74	οὔκουν τῶν φρόνησιν ἀσκούντων τὸ βιάζεσθαι , ἀλλὰ τῶν ἰσχὺν ἄνευ γνώμης ἐχόντων τὰ τοιαῦτα πράττειν ἐστίν .
It is not, then, cultivation of wisdom that leads to violent methods, but the possession of power without prudence.

75	ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ συμμάχων ὁ μὲν βιάζεσθαι τολμῶν δέοιτ’ ἂν οὐκ ὀλίγων , ὁ δὲ πείθειν δυνάμενος οὐδενός ·
Besides, many supporters are necessary to him who ventures to use force: but he who can persuade needs no confederate, 

76	καὶ γὰρ μόνος ἡγοῖτ’ ἂν δύνασθαι πείθειν .
having confidence in his own unaided power of persuasion.

77	καὶ φονεύειν δὲ τοῖς τοιούτοις ἥκιστα συμβαίνει ·
And such a man has no occasion to shed blood; 

78	τίς γὰρ ἀποκτεῖναί τινα βούλοιτ’ ἂν μᾶλλον ἢ ζῶντι πειθομένῳ χρῆσθαι ;
for who would rather take a man’s life than have a live and willing follower?

79	ἀλλ’ ἔφη γε ὁ κατήγορος , Σωκράτει ὁμιλητὰ γενομένω Κριτίας τε καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδης πλεῖστα κακὰ τὴν πόλιν ἐποιησάτην .
"But his accuser argued thus. Among the associates of
<persName><surname>Socrates</surname></persName> were Critias
and Alcibiades; and none wrought so many evils to the state."

80	Κριτίας μὲν γὰρ τῶν ἐν τῇ ὀλιγαρχίᾳ πάντων πλεονεκτίστατός τε καὶ βιαιότατος ἐγένετο , Ἀλκιβιάδης δὲ αὖ τῶν ἐν τῇ δημοκρατίᾳ πάντων ἀκρατέστατός τε καὶ ὑβριστότατος .
For Critias in the days of the oligarchy bore the palm for greed and violence: Alcibiades, for his part, exceeded all in licentiousness and insolence under the democracy.

81	ἐγὼ δ’ , εἰ μέν τι κακὸν ἐκείνω τὴν πόλιν ἐποιησάτην , οὐκ ἀπολογήσομαι ·
Now I have no intention of excusing the wrong these two men wrought the state; 

82	τὴν δὲ πρὸς Σωκράτην συνουσίαν αὐτοῖν ὡς ἐγένετο διηγήσομαι .
but I will explain how they came to be with Socrates. 

83	ἐγενέσθην μὲν γὰρ δὴ τὼ ἄνδρε τούτω φύσει φιλοτιμοτάτω πάντων Ἀθηναίων , βουλομένω τε πάντα δι’ ἑαυτῶν πράττεσθαι καὶ πάντων ὀνομαστοτάτω γενέσθαι .
Ambition was the very life-blood of both: no Athenian was ever like them. They were eager to get control of everything and to outstrip every rival in notoriety. 

84	ᾔδεσαν δὲ Σωκράτην ἀπ’ ἐλαχίστων μὲν χρημάτων αὐταρκέστατα ζῶντα , τῶν ἡδονῶν δὲ πασῶν ἐγκρατέστατον ὄντα , τοῖς δὲ διαλεγομένοις αὐτῷ πᾶσι χρώμενον ἐν τοῖς λόγοις ὅπως βούλοιτο .
They knew that Socrates was living on very little, and yet was wholly independent; that he was strictly moderate in all his pleasures; and that in argument he could do what he liked with any disputant. Sharing this knowledge and the principles I have indicated, is it to be supposed that these two men wanted to adopt the simple life of Socrates, and with this object in view sought his society? Did they not rather think that by associating with him they would attain the utmost proficiency in speech and action?

85	ταῦτα δὲ ὁρῶντε καὶ ὄντε οἵω προείρησθον , πότερόν τις αὐτὼ φῇ τοῦ βίου τοῦ Σωκράτους ἐπιθυμήσαντε καὶ τῆς σωφροσύνης , ἣν ἐκεῖνος εἶχεν , ὀρέξασθαι τῆς ὁμιλίας αὐτοῦ , ἢ νομίσαντε , εἰ ὁμιλησαίτην ἐκείνῳ , γενέσθαι ἂν ἱκανωτάτω λέγειν τε καὶ πράττειν ;
For my part I believe that, had heaven granted them the choice between the life they saw Socrates leading and death, they would have chosen rather to die. Their conduct betrayed their purpose; for as soon as they thought themselves superior to their fellow-disciples they sprang away from Socrates and took to politics; it was for political ends that they had wanted Socrates.

86	ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ ἡγοῦμαι , θεοῦ διδόντος αὐτοῖν ἢ ζῆν ὅλον τὸν βίον ὥσπερ ζῶντα Σωκράτην ἑώρων ἢ τεθνάναι , ἑλέσθαι ἂν μᾶλλον αὐτὼ τεθνάναι .
For my part I believe that, had heaven granted them the choice between the life they saw Socrates leading and death, they would have chosen rather to die. 

87	δήλω δ’ ἐγενέσθην ἐξ ὧν ἐπραξάτην ·
Their conduct betrayed their purpose; 

88	ὡς γὰρ τάχιστα κρείττονε τῶν συγγιγνομένων ἡγησάσθην εἶναι , εὐθὺς ἀποπηδήσαντε Σωκράτους ἐπραττέτην τὰ πολιτικά , ὧνπερ ἕνεκα Σωκράτους ὠρεχθήτην .
for as soon as they thought themselves superior to their fellow-disciples they sprang away from Socrates and took to politics; it was for political ends that they had wanted Socrates. 

89	ἴσως οὖν εἴποι τις ἂν πρὸς ταῦτα ὅτι ἐχρῆν τὸν Σωκράτην μὴ πρότερον τὰ πολιτικὰ διδάσκειν τοὺς συνόντας ἢ σωφρονεῖν .
But it may be answered: Socrates should have taught his companions prudence before politics.

90	ἐγὼ δὲ πρὸς τοῦτο μὲν οὐκ ἀντιλέγω ·
I do not deny it; 

91	πάντας δὲ τοὺς διδάσκοντας ὁρῶ αὑτοὺς δεικνύντας τε τοῖς μανθάνουσιν ᾗπερ αὐτοὶ ποιοῦσιν ἃ διδάσκουσι καὶ τῷ λόγῳ προσβιβάζοντας .
but I find that all teachers show their disciples how they themselves practise what they teach, and lead them on by argument. 

92	οἶδα δὲ καὶ Σωκράτην δεικνύντα τοῖς συνοῦσιν ἑαυτὸν καλὸν κ- ἀγαθὸν ὄντα καὶ διαλεγόμενον κάλλιστα περὶ ἀρετῆς καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρωπίνων .
And I know that it was so with Socrates: he showed his companions that he was a gentleman himself, and talked most excellently of goodness and of all things that concern man. 

93	οἶδα δὲ κ- ἐκείνω σωφρονοῦντε , ἔστε Σωκράτει συνήστην , οὐ φοβουμένω μὴ ζημιοῖντο ἢ παίοιντο ὑπὸ Σωκράτους , ἀλλ’ οἰομένω τότε κράτιστον εἶναι τοῦτο πράττειν .
I know further that even those two were prudent so long as they were with Socrates, not from fear of fine or blow, but because at that time they really believed in prudent conduct. 

94	ἴσως οὖν εἴποιεν ἂν πολλοὶ τῶν φασκόντων φιλοσοφεῖν ὅτι οὐκ ἄν ποτε ὁ δίκαιος ἄδικος γένοιτο , οὐδὲ ὁ σώφρων ὑβριστής , οὐδὲ ἄλλο οὐδὲν ὧν μάθησίς ἐστιν ὁ μαθὼν ἀνεπιστήμων ἄν ποτε γένοιτο .
But many self-styled lovers of wisdom may reply: A just man can never become unjust; a prudent man can never become wanton; in fact no one having learned any kind of knowledge can become ignorant of it. 

95	ἐγὼ δὲ περὶ τούτων οὐχ οὕτω γιγνώσκω ·
I do not hold with this view.

96	ὁρῶ γὰρ ὥσπερ τὰ τοῦ σώματος ἔργα τοὺς μὴ τὰ σώματα ἀσκοῦντας οὐ δυναμένους ποιεῖν , οὕτω καὶ τὰ τῆς ψυχῆς ἔργα τοὺς μὴ τὴν ψυχὴν ἀσκοῦντας οὐ δυναμένους ·
I notice that as those who do not train the body cannot perform the functions proper to the body, so those who do not train the soul cannot perform the functions of the soul: 

97	οὔτε γὰρ ἃ δεῖ πράττειν οὔτε ὧν δεῖ ἀπέχεσθαι δύνανται .
for they cannot do what they ought to do nor avoid what they ought not to do.

98	δι’ ὃ καὶ τοὺς υἱεῖς οἱ πατέρες , κἂν ὦσι σώφρονες , ὅμως ἀπὸ τῶν πονηρῶν ἀνθρώπων εἴργουσιν , ὡς τὴν μὲν τῶν χρηστῶν ὁμιλίαν ἄσκησιν οὖσαν τῆς ἀρετῆς , τὴν δὲ τῶν πονηρῶν κατάλυσιν .
For this cause fathers try to keep their sons, even if they are prudent lads, out of bad company: for the society of honest men is a training in virtue, but the society of the bad is virtue’s undoing.

99	μαρτυρεῖ δὲ καὶ τῶν ποιητῶν ὅ τε λέγων ·
As one of the poets says, 

100	ἐσθλῶν μὲν γὰρ ἄπ’ ἐσθλὰ διδάξεαι ·
"From the good shalt thou learn good things; 

101	ἢν δὲ κακοῖσι συμμίσγῃς , ἀπολεῖς καὶ τὸν ἐόντα νόον , καὶ ὁ λέγων ·
but if thou minglest with the bad thou shalt lose even what thou hast of wisdom." And another says, 

102	αὐτὰρ ἀνὴρ ἀγαθὸς τοτὲ μὲν κακός , ἄλλοτε δ’ ἐσθλός .
"Ah, but a good man is at one time noble, at another base."

103	κ- ἐγὼ δὲ μαρτυρῶ τούτοις ·


104	ὁρῶ γὰρ ὥσπερ τῶν ἐν μέτρῳ πεποιημένων ἐπῶν τοὺς μὴ μελετῶντας ἐπιλανθανομένους , οὕτω καὶ τῶν διδασκαλικῶν λόγων τοῖς ἀμελοῦσι λήθην ἐγγιγνομένην .
I see that, just as poetry is forgotten unless it is often repeated, so instruction, when no longer heeded, fades from the mind.

105	ὅταν δὲ τῶν νουθετικῶν λόγων ἐπιλάθηταί τις , ἐπιλέλησται καὶ ὧν ἡ ψυχὴ πάσχουσα τῆς σωφροσύνης ἐπεθύμει ·
To forget good counsel is to forget the experiences that prompted the soul to desire prudence.

106	τούτων δ’ ἐπιλαθόμενον οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν καὶ τῆς σωφροσύνης ἐπιλαθέσθαι .
And when those are forgotten, it is not surprising that prudence itself is forgotten.

107	ὁρῶ δὲ καὶ τοὺς εἰς φιλοποσίαν προαχθέντας καὶ τοὺς εἰς ἔρωτας ἐγκυλισθέντας ἧττον δυναμένους τῶν τε δεόντων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι καὶ τῶν μὴ δεόντων ἀπέχεσθαι .
I see also that men who take to drink or get involved in love intrigues lose the power of caring about right conduct and avoiding evil.

108	πολλοὶ γὰρ καὶ χρημάτων δυνάμενοι φείδεσθαι , πρὶν ἐρᾶν , ἐρασθέντες οὐκέτι δύνανται ·
For many who are careful with their money no sooner fall in love than they begin to waste it.

109	καὶ τὰ χρήματα καταναλώσαντες , ὧν πρόσθεν ἀπείχοντο κερδῶν , αἰσχρὰ νομίζοντες εἶναι , τούτων οὐκ ἀπέχονται .
And when they have spent it all, they no longer shrink from making more by methods which they formerly avoided because they thought them disgraceful.

110	πῶς οὖν οὐκ ἐνδέχεται σωφρονήσαντα πρόσθεν αὖθις μὴ σωφρονεῖν καὶ δίκαια δυνηθέντα πράττειν αὖθις ἀδυνατεῖν ;
How then can it be impossible for one who was prudent to lose his prudence, for one who was capable of just action to become incapable?

111	πάντα μὲν οὖν ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ τὰ καλὰ καὶ τ- ἀγαθὰ ἀσκητὰ εἶναι , οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ σωφροσύνη .
To me indeed it seems that whatever is honourable, whatever is good in conduct is the result of training, and that this is especially true of prudence.

112	ἐν γὰρ τῷ αὐτῷ σώματι συμπεφυτευμέναι τῇ ψυχῇ αἱ ἡδοναὶ πείθουσιν αὐτὴν μὴ σωφρονεῖν , ἀλλὰ τὴν ταχίστην ἑαυταῖς τε καὶ τῷ σώματι χαρίζεσθαι .
For in the same body along with the soul are planted the pleasures which call to her: "Abandon prudence, and make haste to gratify us and the body."

113	καὶ Κριτίας δὴ καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδης , ἕως μὲν Σωκράτει συνήστην , ἐδυνάσθην ἐκείνῳ χρωμένω συμμάχῳ τῶν μὴ καλῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν κρατεῖν ·
And indeed it was thus with Critias and Alcibiades. So long as they were with Socrates, they found in him an ally who gave them strength to conquer their evil passions.

114	ἐκείνου δ’ ἀπαλλαγέντε , Κριτίας μὲν φυγὼν εἰς Θετταλίαν ἐκεῖ συνῆν ἀνθρώποις ἀνομίᾳ μᾶλλον ἢ δικαιοσύνῃ χρωμένοις , Ἀλκιβιάδης δ’ αὖ διὰ μὲν κάλλος ὑπὸ πολλῶν καὶ σεμνῶν γυναικῶν θηρώμενος , διὰ δύναμιν δὲ τὴν ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ τοῖς συμμάχοις ὑπὸ πολλῶν καὶ δυνατῶν κολακεύειν ἀνθρώπων διαθρυπτόμενος , ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ δήμου τιμώμενος καὶ ῥᾳδίως πρωτεύων , ὥσπερ οἱ τῶν γυμνικῶν ἀγώνων ἀθληταὶ ῥᾳδίως πρωτεύοντες ἀμελοῦσι τῆς ἀσκήσεως , οὕτω κ- ἐκεῖνος ἠμέλησεν αὑτοῦ .
But when they parted from him, Critias fled to Thessaly, and got among men who put lawlessness before justice; while Alcibiades, on account of his beauty, was hunted by many great ladies, and because of his influence at Athens and among her allies he was spoilt by many powerful men.

115	τοιούτων δὲ συμβάντων αὐτοῖν , καὶ ὠγκωμένω μὲν ἐπὶ γένει , ἐπηρμένω δ’ ἐπὶ πλούτῳ , πεφυσημένω δ’ ἐπὶ δυνάμει , διατεθρυμμένω δὲ ὑπὸ πολλῶν ἀνθρώπων , ἐπὶ δὲ πᾶσι τούτοις διεφθαρμένω καὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἀπὸ Σωκράτους γεγονότε , τί θαυμαστὸν εἰ ὑπερηφάνω ἐγενέσθην ;
And as athletes who gain an easy victory in the games are apt to neglect their training, so the honour in which he was held, the cheap triumph he won with the people, led him to neglect himself.

116	εἶτα , εἰ μέν τι ἐπλημμελησάτην , τούτου Σωκράτην ὁ κατήγορος αἰτιᾶται ;
Such was their fortune: and when to pride of birth, confidence in wealth, vainglory and much yielding to temptation were added corruption and long separation from Socrates, what wonder if they grew overbearing?

117	ὅτι δὲ νέω ὄντε αὐτώ , ἡνίκα καὶ ἀγνωμονεστάτω καὶ ἀκρατεστάτω εἰκὸς εἶναι , Σωκράτης παρέσχε σώφρονε , οὐδενὸς ἐπαίνου δοκεῖ τῷ κατηγόρῳ ἄξιος εἶναι ;
For their wrongdoing, then, is Socrates to be called to account by his accuser? And does he deserve no word of praise for having controlled them in the days of their youth, when they would naturally be most reckless and licentious?

118	οὐ μὴν τά γε ἄλλα οὕτω κρίνεται .
For what teacher of flute, lyre, or anything else, after making his pupils proficient, is held to blame if they leave him for another master, and then turn out incompetent?

119	τίς μὲν γὰρ αὐλητής , τίς δὲ κιθαριστής , τίς δὲ ἄλλος διδάσκαλος ἱκανοὺς ποιήσας τοὺς μαθητάς , ἐὰν πρὸς ἄλλους ἐλθόντες χείρους φανῶσιν , αἰτίαν ἔχει τούτου ;


120	τίς δὲ πατήρ , ἐὰν ὁ παῖς αὐτοῦ συνδιατρίβων τῳ σωφρονῇ , ὕστερον δὲ ἄλλῳ τῳ συγγενόμενος πονηρὸς γένηται , τὸν πρόσθεν αἰτιᾶται , ἀλλ’ οὐχ ὅσῳ ἂν παρὰ τῷ ὑστέρῳ χείρων φαίνηται , τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον ἐπαινεῖ τὸν πρότερον ;
What father, whose son bears a good character so long as he is with one master, but goes wrong after he has attached himself to another, throws the blame on the earlier teacher? Is it not true that the worse the boy turns out with the second, the higher is his father’s praise of the first? 

121	ἀλλ’ οἵ γε πατέρες αὐτοὶ συνόντες τοῖς υἱέσι , τῶν παίδων πλημμελούντων , οὐκ αἰτίαν ἔχουσιν , ἐὰν αὐτοὶ σωφρονῶσιν .
Nay, fathers themselves, living with their sons, are not held responsible for their boys’ wrongdoing if they are themselves prudent men.

122	οὕτω δὲ καὶ Σωκράτην δίκαιον ἦν κρίνειν ·
This is the test which should have been applied to Socrates too. 

123	εἰ μὲν αὐτὸς ἐποίει τι φαῦλον , εἰκότως ἂν ἐδόκει πονηρὸς εἶναι ·
If there was anything base in his own life, he might fairly have been thought vicious. 

124	εἰ δ’ αὐτὸς σωφρονῶν διετέλει , πῶς ἂν δικαίως τῆς οὐκ ἐνούσης αὐτῷ κακίας αἰτίαν ἔχοι ;
But, if his own conduct was always prudent, how can he be fairly held to blame for the evil that was not in him?

125	ἀλλ’ εἰ καὶ μηδὲν αὐτὸς πονηρὸν ποιῶν ἐκείνους φαῦλα πράττοντας ὁρῶν ἐπῄνει , δικαίως ἂν ἐπιτιμῷτο .
Nevertheless, although he was himself free from vice, if he saw and approved of base conduct in them, he would be open to censure.

126	Κριτίαν μὲν τοίνυν αἰσθανόμενος ἐρῶντα Εὐθυδήμου καὶ πειρῶντα χρῆσθαι , καθάπερ οἱ πρὸς τ- ἀφροδίσια τῶν σωμάτων ἀπολαύοντες , ἀπέτρεπε φάσκων ἀνελεύθερόν τε εἶναι καὶ οὐ πρέπον ἀνδρὶ καλῷ κ- ἀγαθῷ τὸν ἐρώμενον , ᾧ βούλεται πολλοῦ ἄξιος φαίνεσθαι , προσαιτεῖν ὥσπερ τοὺς πτωχοὺς ἱκετεύοντα καὶ δεόμενον προσδοῦναι , καὶ ταῦτα μηδενὸς ἀγαθοῦ .
Well, when he found that Critias loved Euthydemus and wanted to lead him astray, he tried to restrain him by saying that it was mean and unbecoming in a gentleman to sue like a beggar to the object of his affection, whose good opinion he coveted, stooping to ask a favor that it was wrong to grant.

127	τοῦ δὲ Κριτίου τοῖς τοιούτοις οὐχ ὑπακούοντος οὐδὲ ἀποτρεπομένου , λέγεται τὸν Σωκράτην ἄλλων τε πολλῶν παρόντων καὶ τοῦ Εὐθυδήμου εἰπεῖν ὅτι ὑικὸν αὐτῷ δοκοίη πάσχειν ὁ Κριτίας , ἐπιθυμῶν Εὐθυδήμῳ προσκνῆσθαι ὥσπερ τὰ ὕδια τοῖς λίθοις .
As Critias paid no heed whatever to this protest, Socrates, it is said, exclaimed in the presence of Euthydemus and many others, "Critias seems to have the feelings of a pig: he can no more keep away from Euthydemus than pigs can help rubbing themselves against stones."

128	ἐξ ὧν δὴ καὶ ἐμίσει τὸν Σωκράτην ὁ Κριτίας , ὥστε καὶ ὅτε τῶν τριάκοντα ὢν νομοθέτης μετὰ Χαρικλέους ἐγένετο , ἀπεμνημόνευσεν αὐτῷ καὶ ἐν τοῖς νόμοις ἔγραψε λόγων τέχνην μὴ διδάσκειν , ἐπηρεάζων ἐκείνῳ καὶ οὐκ ἔχων ὅπῃ ἐπιλάβοιτο , ἀλλὰ τὸ κοινῇ τοῖς φιλοσόφοις ὑπὸ τῶν πολλῶν ἐπιτιμώμενον ἐπιφέρων αὐτῷ καὶ διαβάλλων πρὸς τοὺς πολλούς ·
Now Critias bore a grudge against Socrates for this; and when he was one of the Thirty and was drafting laws with Charicles, he bore it in mind. He inserted a clause which made it illegal "to teach the art of words." It was a calculated insult to Socrates, whom he saw no means of attacking, except by imputing to him the practice constantly attributed to philosophers.

129	οὐδὲ γὰρ ἔγωγε οὔτ’ αὐτὸς τοῦτο πώποτε Σωκράτους ἤκουσα οὔτ’ ἄλλου του φάσκοντος ἀκηκοέναι ᾐσθόμην .
For I myself never heard Socrates indulge in the practice, nor knew of anyone who professed to have heard him do so. 

130	ἐδήλωσε δέ ·
The truth came out.

131	ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ τριάκοντα πολλοὺς μὲν τῶν πολιτῶν καὶ οὐ τοὺς χειρίστους ἀπέκτεινον , πολλοὺς δὲ προετρέποντο ἀδικεῖν , εἶπέ που ὁ Σωκράτης ὅτι θαυμαστόν οἱ δοκοίη εἶναι , εἴ τις γενόμενος βοῶν ἀγέλης νομεὺς καὶ τὰς βοῦς ἐλάττους τε καὶ χείρους ποιῶν μὴ ὁμολογοίη κακὸς βουκόλος εἶναι , ἔτι δὲ θαυμαστότερον , εἴ τις προστάτης γενόμενος πόλεως καὶ ποιῶν τοὺς πολίτας ἐλάττους τε καὶ χείρους μὴ αἰσχύνεται μηδ’ οἴεται κακὸς εἶναι προστάτης τῆς πόλεως .
When the Thirty were putting to death many citizens of the highest respectability and were encouraging many in crime, Socrates had remarked: "It seems strange enough to me that a herdsman who lets his cattle decrease and go to the bad should not admit that he is a poor cowherd; but stranger still that a statesman when he causes the citizens to decrease and go to the bad, should feel no shame nor think himself a poor statesman."

132	ἀπαγγελθέντος δὲ αὐτοῖς τούτου , καλέσαντες ὅ τε Κριτίας καὶ ὁ Χαρικλῆς τὸν Σωκράτην τόν τε νόμον ἐδεικνύτην αὐτῷ καὶ τοῖς νέοις ἀπειπέτην μὴ διαλέγεσθαι .
This remark was reported to Critias and Charicles, who sent for Socrates, showed him the law and forbade him to hold conversation with the young.

133	ὁ δὲ Σωκράτης ἐπήρετο αὐτὼ εἰ ἐξείη πυνθάνεσθαι , εἴ τι ἀγνοοῖτο τῶν προαγορευομένων .
"May I question you," asked Socrates, "in case I do not understand any point in your orders?"

134	τὼ δ’ ἐφάτην .
"You may," said they.

135	ἐγὼ τοίνυν , ἔφη , παρεσκεύασμαι μὲν πείθεσθαι τοῖς νόμοις ·
"Well now," said he, "I am ready to obey the laws. 

136	ὅπως δὲ μὴ δι’ ἄγνοιαν λάθω τι παρανομήσας , τοῦτο βούλομαι σαφῶς μαθεῖν παρ’ ὑμῶν , πότερον τὴν τῶν λόγων τέχνην σὺν τοῖς ὀρθῶς λεγομένοις εἶναι νομίζοντες ἢ σὺν τοῖς μὴ ὀρθῶς ἀπέχεσθαι κελεύετε αὐτῆς .
But lest I unwittingly transgress through ignorance, I want clear directions from you. Do you think that the art of words from which you bid me abstain is associated with sound or unsound reasoning?

137	εἰ μὲν γὰρ σὺν τοῖς ὀρθῶς , δῆλον ὅτι ἀφεκτέον ἂν εἴη τοῦ ὀρθῶς λέγειν ·
 For if with sound, then clearly I must abstain from sound reasoning: 

138	εἰ δὲ σὺν τοῖς μὴ ὀρθῶς , δῆλον ὅτι πειρατέον ὀρθῶς λέγειν .
but if with unsound, clearly I must try to reason soundly."

139	καὶ ὁ Χαρικλῆς ὀργισθεὶς αὐτῷ , ἐπειδή , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἀγνοεῖς , τάδε σοι εὐμαθέστερα ὄντα προαγορεύομεν , τοῖς νέοις ὅλως μὴ διαλέγεσθαι .
"Since you are ignorant, Socrates," said Charicles in an angry tone, "we put our order into language easier to understand. You may not hold any converse whatever with the young."

140	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης , ἵνα τοίνυν , ἔφη , μὴ ἀμφίβολον ᾖ ὡς ἄλλο τι ποιῶ ἢ τὰ προηγορευμένα , ὁρίσατέ μοι μέχρι πόσων ἐτῶν δεῖ νομίζειν νέους εἶναι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους .
"Well then," said Socrates, "that there may be no question raised about my obedience, please fix the age limit below which a man is to be accounted young."

141	καὶ ὁ Χαρικλῆς , ὅσουπερ , εἶπε , χρόνου βουλεύειν οὐκ ἔξεστιν , ὡς οὔπω φρονίμοις οὖσι ·
"So long," replied Charicles, "as he is not permitted to sit in the Council, because as yet he lacks wisdom. 

142	μηδὲ σὺ διαλέγου νεωτέροις τριάκοντα ἐτῶν .
You shall not converse with anyone who is under thirty."

143	μηδ’ ἐάν τι ὠνῶμαι , ἔφη , ἢν πωλῇ νεώτερος τριάκοντα ἐτῶν , ἔρωμαι ὁπόσου πωλεῖ ;
"Suppose I want to buy something, am I not even then to ask the price if the seller is under thirty?"

144	ναὶ τά γε τοιαῦτα , ἔφη ὁ Χαρικλῆς ·
"Oh yes," answered Charicles, "you may in such cases."

145	ἀλλά τοι σύγε , ὦ Σώκρατες , εἴωθας εἰδὼς πῶς ἔχει τὰ πλεῖστα ἐρωτᾶν ·
"But the fact is, Socrates, you are in the habit of asking questions to which you know the answer: 

146	ταῦτα οὖν μὴ ἐρώτα .
so that is what you are not to do."

147	μηδ’ ἀποκρίνωμαι οὖν , ἔφη , ἄν τίς με ἐρωτᾷ νέος , ἐὰν εἰδῶ , οἷον ποῦ οἰκεῖ Χαρικλῆς ἢ ποῦ ἐστι Κριτίας ;
"Am I to give no answer, then, if a young man asks me something that I know? — for instance, 'Where does Charicles live?' or 'Where is Critias?'"

148	ναὶ τά γε τοιαῦτα , ἔφη ὁ Χαρικλῆς .


149	ὁ δὲ Κριτίας , ἀλλὰ τῶνδέ τοί σε ἀπέχεσθαι , ἔφη , δεήσει , ὦ Σώκρατες , τῶν σκυτέων καὶ τῶν τεκτόνων καὶ τῶν χαλκέων ·
"But you see, Socrates," explained Critias, "you will have to avoid your favourite topic, — the cobblers, builders and metal workers; 

150	καὶ γὰρ οἶμαι αὐτοὺς ἤδη κατατετρῖφθαι διαθρυλουμένους ὑπὸ σοῦ .
for it is already worn to rags by you in my opinion."

151	οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , καὶ τῶν ἑπομένων τούτοις , τοῦ τε δικαίου καὶ τοῦ ὁσίου καὶ τῶν ἄλλων τῶν τοιούτων ;
"Then must I keep off the subjects of which these supply illustrations, Justice, Holiness, and so forth?"

152	ναὶ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Χαρικλῆς ·
"Indeed yes," said Charicles, "and cowherds too: else you may find the cattle decrease."

153	καὶ τῶν βουκόλων γε ·
"and cowherds too: 

154	εἰ δὲ μή , φυλάττου ὅπως μὴ καὶ σὺ ἐλάττους τὰς βοῦς ποιήσῃς .
else you may find the cattle decrease."

155	ἔνθα καὶ δῆλον ἐγένετο ὅτι ἀπαγγελθέντος αὐτοῖς τοῦ περὶ τῶν βοῶν λόγου ὠργίζοντο τῷ Σωκράτει .
Thus the truth was out: the remark about the cattle had been repeated to them, and it was this that made them angry with him.

156	οἵα μὲν οὖν ἡ συνουσία ἐγεγόνει Κριτίᾳ πρὸς Σωκράτην καὶ ὡς εἶχον πρὸς ἀλλήλους , εἴρηται .
So much, then, for the connection of Critias with Socrates and their relation to each other.

157	φαίην δ’ ἂν ἔγωγε μηδενὶ μηδεμίαν εἶναι παίδευσιν παρὰ τοῦ μὴ ἀρέσκοντος .
I venture to lay it down that learners get nothing from a teacher with whom they are out of sympathy.

158	Κριτίας δὲ καὶ Ἀλκιβιάδης οὐκ ἀρέσκοντος αὐτοῖς Σωκράτους ὡμιλησάτην ὃν χρόνον ὡμιλείτην αὐτῷ , ἀλλ’ εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς ὡρμηκότε προεστάναι τῆς πόλεως .
Now, all the time that Critias and Alcibiades associated with Socrates, they were out of sympathy with him, but from the very first, their ambition was political advancement.

159	ἔτι γὰρ Σωκράτει συνόντες οὐκ ἄλλοις τισὶ μᾶλλον ἐπεχείρουν διαλέγεσθαι ἢ τοῖς μάλιστα πράττουσι τὰ πολιτικά .
For while they were still with him, they tried to converse, whenever possible, with prominent politicians.

160	λέγεται γὰρ Ἀλκιβιάδην , πρὶν εἴκοσιν ἐτῶν εἶναι , Περικλεῖ ἐπιτρόπῳ μὲν ὄντι αὐτοῦ , προστάτῃ δὲ τῆς πόλεως , τοιάδε διαλεχθῆναι περὶ νόμων ·
Indeed, there is a story told of Alcibiades, that, when he was less than twenty years old, he had a talk about laws with Pericles, his guardian, the first citizen in the State.

161	εἰπέ μοι , φάναι , ὦ Περίκλεις , ἔχοις ἄν με διδάξαι τί ἐστι νόμος ;
"Tell me, Pericles," he said, "can you teach me what a law is?"

162	πάντως δήπου , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα .
"Certainly," he replied.

163	δίδαξον δὴ πρὸς τῶν θεῶν , φάναι τὸν Ἀλκιβιάδην ·
"Then pray teach me. 

164	ὡς ἐγὼ ἀκούων τινῶν ἐπαινουμένων , ὅτι νόμιμοι ἄνδρες εἰσίν , οἶμαι μὴ ἂν δικαίως τούτου τυχεῖν τοῦ ἐπαίνου τὸν μὴ εἰδότα τί ἐστι νόμος .
For whenever I hear men praised for keeping the laws, it occurs to me that no one can really deserve that praise who does not know what a law is."

165	ἀλλ’ οὐδέν τι χαλεποῦ πράγματος ἐπιθυμεῖς , ὦ Ἀλκιβιάδη , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα , βουλόμενος γνῶναι τί ἐστι νόμος ·
"Well, Alcibiades, there is no great difficulty about what you desire. You wish to know what a law is. 

166	πάντες γὰρ οὗτοι νόμοι εἰσίν , οὓς τὸ πλῆθος συνελθὸν καὶ δοκιμάσαν ἔγραψε , φράζον ἅ τε δεῖ ποιεῖν καὶ ἃ μή .
Laws are all the rules approved and enacted by the majority in assembly, whereby they declare what ought and what ought not to be done."

167	πότερον δὲ τ- ἀγαθὰ νομίσαν δεῖν ποιεῖν ἢ τὰ κακά ;
"Do they suppose it is right to do good or evil?"

168	τ- ἀγαθὰ νὴ Δία , φάναι , ὦ μειράκιον , τὰ δὲ κακὰ οὔ .
"Good, of course, young man, — not evil."

169	ἐὰν δὲ μὴ τὸ πλῆθος , ἀλλ’ , ὥσπερ ὅπου ὀλιγαρχία ἐστίν , ὀλίγοι συνελθόντες γράψωσιν ὅ τι χρὴ ποιεῖν , ταῦτα τί ἐστι ;
"But if, as happens under an oligarchy, not the majority, but a minority meet and enact rules of conduct, what are these?"

170	πάντα , φάναι , ὅσα ἂν τὸ κρατοῦν τῆς πόλεως βουλευσάμενον , ἃ χρὴ ποιεῖν , γράψῃ , νόμος καλεῖται .
"Whatsoever the sovereign power in the State, after deliberation, enacts and directs to be done is known as a law."

171	κἂν τύραννος οὖν κρατῶν τῆς πόλεως γράψῃ τοῖς πολίταις ἃ χρὴ ποιεῖν , καὶ ταῦτα νόμος ἐστί ;
"If, then, a despot, being the sovereign power, enacts what the citizens are to do, are his orders also a law?"

172	καὶ ὅσα τύραννος ἄρχων , φάναι , γράφει , καὶ ταῦτα νόμος καλεῖται .
"Yes, whatever a despot as ruler enacts is also known as a law."

173	βία δέ , φάναι , καὶ ἀνομία τί ἐστιν , ὦ Περίκλεις ;
But force, the negation of law, what is that, Pericles? 

174	ἆρ’ οὐχ ὅταν ὁ κρείττων τὸν ἥττω μὴ πείσας , ἀλλὰ βιασάμενος , ἀναγκάσῃ ποιεῖν ὅ τι ἂν αὐτῷ δοκῇ ;
Is it not the action of the stronger when he constrains the weaker to do whatever he chooses, not by persuasion, but by force?

175	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα .
That is my opinion.

176	καὶ ὅσα ἄρα τύραννος μὴ πείσας τοὺς πολίτας ἀναγκάζει ποιεῖν γράφων , ἀνομία ἐστί ;
Then whatever a despot by enactment constrains the citizens to do without persuasion, is the negation of law?

177	δοκεῖ μοι , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα ·
I think so: 

178	ἀνατίθεμαι γὰρ τὸ ὅσα τύραννος μὴ πείσας γράφει νόμον εἶναι .
and I withdraw my answer that whatever a despot enacts without persuasion is a law.

179	ὅσα δὲ οἱ ὀλίγοι τοὺς πολλοὺς μὴ πείσαντες , ἀλλὰ κρατοῦντες γράφουσι , πότερον βίαν φῶμεν ἢ μὴ φῶμεν εἶναι ;
And when the minority passes enactments, not by persuading the majority, but through using its power, are we to call that force or not?

180	πάντα μοι δοκεῖ , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα , ὅσα τις μὴ πείσας ἀναγκάζει τινὰ ποιεῖν , εἴτε γράφων εἴτε μή , βία μᾶλλον ἢ νόμος εἶναι .
Everything, I think, that men constrain others to do without persuasion, whether by enactment or not, is not law, but force.

181	καὶ ὅσα ἄρα τὸ πᾶν πλῆθος κρατοῦν τῶν τὰ χρήματα ἐχόντων γράφει μὴ πεῖσαν , βία μᾶλλον ἢ νόμος ἂν εἴη ;
It follows then, that whatever the assembled majority, through using its power over the owners of property, enacts without persuasion is not law, but force?

182	μάλα τοι , φάναι τὸν Περικλέα , ὦ Ἀλκιβιάδη , καὶ ἡμεῖς τηλικοῦτοι ὄντως δεινοὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα ἦμεν ·
Alcibiades, said Pericles, "at your age, I may tell you, we, too, were very clever at this sort of thing. 

183	τοιαῦτα γὰρ καὶ ἐμελετῶμεν καὶ ἐσοφιζόμεθα οἷάπερ καὶ σὺ νῦν ἐμοὶ δοκεῖς μελετᾶν .
For the puzzles we thought about and exercised our wits on were just such as you seem to think about now."

184	τὸν δὲ Ἀλκιβιάδην φάναι ·
Alcibiades cried out:

185	εἴθε σοι , ὦ Περίκλεις , τότε συνεγενόμην ὅτε δεινότατος ἑαυτοῦ ἦσθα .
"if only I had known you intimately when you were at your cleverest in these things!"

186	ἐπεὶ τοίνυν τάχιστα τῶν πολιτευομένων ὑπέλαβον κρείττονες εἶναι , Σωκράτει μὲν οὐκέτι προσῇσαν ·
So soon, then, as they presumed themselves to be the superiors of the politicians, they no longer came near Socrates.

187	οὔτε γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἄλλως ἤρεσκεν , εἴ τε προσέλθοιεν , ὑπὲρ ὧν ἡμάρτανον ἐλεγχόμενοι ἤχθοντο ·
For apart from their general want of sympathy with him, they resented being cross-examined about their errors when they came.

188	τὰ δὲ τῆς πόλεως ἔπραττον , ὧνπερ ἕνεκεν καὶ Σωκράτει προσῆλθον .
Politics had brought them to Socrates, and for politics they left him.

189	ἀλλὰ Κρίτων τε Σωκράτους ἦν ὁμιλητὴς καὶ Χαιρεφῶν καὶ Χαιρεκράτης καὶ Ἑρμογένης καὶ Σιμμίας καὶ Κέβης καὶ Φαιδώνδας καὶ ἄλλοι , οἳ ἐκείνῳ συνῆσαν , οὐχ ἵνα δημηγορικοὶ ἢ δικανικοὶ γένοιντο , ἀλλ’ ἵνα καλοί τε κ- ἀγαθοὶ γενόμενοι καὶ οἴκῳ καὶ οἰκέταις καὶ οἰκείοις καὶ φίλοις καὶ πόλει καὶ πολίταις δύναιντο καλῶς χρῆσθαι .
But Criton was a true associate of Socrates, as were Chaerophon, Chaerecrates, Hermogenes, Simmias, Cebes, Phaedondas, and others who consorted with him not that they might shine in the courts or the assembly, but that they might become gentlemen, and be able to do their duty by house and household, and relatives and friends, and city and citizens.

190	καὶ τούτων οὐδεὶς οὔτε νεώτερος οὔτε πρεσβύτερος ὢν οὔτ’ ἐποίησε κακὸν οὐδὲν οὔτ’ αἰτίαν ἔσχεν .
Of these not one, in his youth or old age, did evil or incurred censure.

191	ἀλλὰ Σωκράτης γ’ , ἔφη ὁ κατήγορος , τοὺς πατέρας προπηλακίζειν ἐδίδασκε , πείθων μὲν τοὺς συνόντας αὐτῷ σοφωτέρους ποιεῖν τῶν πατέρων , φάσκων δὲ κατὰ νόμον ἐξεῖναι παρανοίας ἑλόντι καὶ τὸν πατέρα δῆσαι , τεκμηρίῳ τούτῳ χρώμενος , ὡς τὸν ἀμαθέστερον ὑπὸ τοῦ σοφωτέρου νόμιμον εἴη δεδέσθαι .
But, said his accuser, Socrates taught sons to treat their fathers with contempt: he persuaded them that he made his companions wiser than their fathers: he said that the law allowed a son to put his father in prison if he convinced a jury that he was insane; and this was a proof that it was lawful for the wiser to keep the more ignorant in gaol.

192	Σωκράτης δὲ τὸν μὲν ἀμαθίας ἕνεκα δεσμεύοντα δικαίως ἂν καὶ αὐτὸν ᾤετο δεδέσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπισταμένων ἃ μὴ αὐτὸς ἐπίσταται ·
In reality Socrates held that, if you clap fetters on a man for his ignorance, you deserve to be kept in gaol yourself by those whose knowledge is greater than your own:

193	καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἕνεκα πολλάκις ἐσκόπει , τί διαφέρει μανίας ἀμαθία ·
and such reasoning led him frequently to consider the difference between Madness and Ignorance.

194	καὶ τοὺς μὲν μαινομένους ᾤετο συμφερόντως ἂν δεδέσθαι καὶ ἑαυτοῖς καὶ τοῖς φίλοις , τοὺς δὲ μὴ ἐπισταμένους τὰ δέοντα δικαίως ἂν μανθάνειν παρὰ τῶν ἐπισταμένων .
That madmen should be kept in prison was expedient, he thought, both for themselves and for their friends: but those who are ignorant of what they ought to know deserve to learn from those who know it.

195 ἀλλὰ Σωκράτης γε, ἔφη ὁ κατήγορος, οὐ μόνον τοὺς πατέρας ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους συγγενεῖς ἐποίει ἐν ἀτιμίᾳ εἶναι παρὰ τοῖς ἑαυτῷ συνοῦσι, λέγων ὡς οὔτε τοὺς κάμνοντας οὔτε τοὺς δικαζομένους οἱ συγγενεῖς ὠφελοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν οἱ ἰατροί, τοὺς δὲ οἱ συνδικεῖν ἐπιστάμενοι.
But, said his accuser, Socrates caused his companions to dishonour not only their fathers, but their other relations as well, by saying that invalids and litigants get benefit not from their relations, but from their doctor or their counsel.

196 ἔφη δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν φίλων αὐτὸν λέγειν ὡς οὐδὲν ὄφελος εὔνους εἶναι, εἰ μὴ καὶ ὠφελεῖν δυνήσονται.
Of friends too he said that their goodwill was worthless, unless they could combine with it some power to help one.

197 μόνους δὲ φάσκειν αὐτὸν ἀξίους εἶναι τιμῆς τοὺς εἰδότας τὰ δέοντα καὶ ἑρμηνεῦσαι δυναμένους.
Only those deserved honour who knew what was the right thing to do, and could explain it.

198 ἀναπείθοντα οὖν τοὺς νέους αὐτόν, ὡς αὐτὸς εἴη σοφώτατός τε καὶ ἄλλους ἱκανώτατος ποιῆσαι σοφούς, οὕτω διατιθέναι τοὺς ἑαυτῷ συνόντας, ὥστε μηδαμοῦ παρ' αὐτοῖς τοὺς ἄλλους εἶναι πρὸς ἑαυτόν.
Thus by leading the young to think that he excelled in wisdom and in ability to make others wise, he had such an effect on his companions that no one counted for anything in their estimation in comparison with him.

199 ἐγὼ δ' αὐτὸν οἶδα μὲν καὶ περὶ πατέρων τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων συγγενῶν τε καὶ περὶ φίλων ταῦτα λέγοντα.
Now I know that he did use this language about fathers, relations and friends.

200 καὶ πρὸς τούτοις γε δή, ὅτι τῆς ψυχῆς ἐξελθούσης, ἐν ᾗ μόνῃ γίγνεται φρόνησις, τὸ σῶμα τοῦ οἰκειοτάτου ἀνθρώπου τὴν ταχίστην ἐξενέγκαντες ἀφανίζουσιν.
And, what is more, he would say that so soon as the soul, the only seat of intelligence, is gone out of a man, even though he be our nearest and dearest, we carry out his body and hide it in the tomb.

201 ἔλεγε δ' ὅτι καὶ ζῶν ἕκαστος ἑαυτοῦ, ὃ πάντων μάλιστα φιλεῖ, τοῦ σώματος ὅ τι ἂν ἀχρεῖον ᾖ καὶ ἀνωφελές, αὐτός τε ἀφαιρεῖ καὶ ἄλλῳ παρέχει.
Moreover, a man’s dearest friend is himself: yet, even in his lifetime he removes or lets another remove from his body whatever is useless and unprofitable.

202 αὐτοί τέ γε αὑτῶν ὄνυχάς τε καὶ τρίχας καὶ τύλους ἀφαιροῦσι καὶ τοῖς ἰατροῖς παρέχουσι μετὰ πόνων τε καὶ ἀλγηδόνων καὶ ἀποτέμνειν καὶ ἀποκάειν, καὶ τούτων χάριν οἴονται δεῖν αὐτοῖς καὶ μισθὸν τίνειν.
He removes his own nails, hair, corns: he lets the surgeon cut and cauterize him, and, aches and pains notwithstanding, feels bound to thank and fee him for it.

203 καὶ τὸ σίαλον ἐκ τοῦ στόματος ἀποπτύουσιν ὡς δύνανται πορρωτάτω, διότι ὠφελεῖ μὲν οὐδὲν αὐτοὺς ἐνόν, βλάπτει δὲ πολὺ μᾶλλον.
He spits out the saliva from his mouth as far away as he can, because to retain it doesn’t help him, but harms him rather.

204 ταῦτ' οὖν ἔλεγεν οὐ τὸν μὲν πατέρα ζῶντα κατορύττειν διδάσκων, ἑαυτὸν δὲ κατατέμνειν, ἀλλ' ἐπιδεικνύων ὅτι τὸ ἄφρον ἄτιμόν ἐστι παρεκάλει ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τοῦ ὡς φρονιμώτατον εἶναι καὶ ὠφελιμώτατον, ὅπως, ἐάν τε ὑπὸ πατρὸς ἐάν τε ὑπὸ ἀδελφοῦ ἐάν τε ὑπ' ἄλλου τινὸς βούληται τιμᾶσθαι, μὴ τῷ οἰκεῖος εἶναι πιστεύων ἀμελῇ, ἀλλὰ πειρᾶται, ὑφ' ὧν ἂν βούληται τιμᾶσθαι, τούτοις ὠφέλιμος εἶναι.
Now in saying all this, he was not giving a lesson on the duty of burying one’s father alive, or making mincemeat of one’s body: he meant to show that unreason is unworth, and was urging the necessity of cultivating sound sense and usefulness, in order that he who would fain be valued by father or by brother or by anyone else may not rely on the bond of familiarity and neglect him, but may try to be useful to all those by whom he would be valued.

205 ἔφη δ’ αὐτὸν ὁ κατήγορος καὶ τῶν ἐνδοξοτάτων ποιητῶν ἐκλεγόμενον τὰ πονηρότατα καὶ τούτοις μαρτυρίοις χρώμενον διδάσκειν τοὺς συνόντας κακούργους τε εἶναι καὶ τυραννικούς, Ἡσιόδου μὲν τὸ ἔργον δ’ οὐδὲν ὄνειδος, ἀεργίη δέ τ’ ὄνειδος.
Again, his accuser alleged that he selected from the most famous poets the most immoral passages, and used them as evidence in teaching his companions to be tyrants and malefactors: for example, Hesiod’s line: "No work is a disgrace, but idleness is a disgrace."

206 τοῦτο δὴ λέγειν αὐτόν, ὡς ὁ ποιητὴς κελεύει μηδενὸς ἔργου μήτ’ ἀδίκου μήτ’ αἰσχροῦ ἀπέχεσθαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ ταῦτα ποιεῖν ἐπὶ τῷ κέρδει.
He was charged with explaining this line as an injunction to refrain from no work, dishonest or disgraceful, but to do anything for gain.

207 Σωκράτης δ’ ἐπεὶ διομολογήσαιτο τὸ μὲν ἐργάτην εἶναι ὠφέλιμόν τε ἀνθρώπῳ καὶ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι, τὸ δὲ ἀργὸν βλαβερόν τε καὶ κακόν, καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐργάζεσθαι ἀγαθόν, τὸ δ’ ἀργεῖν κακόν, τοὺς μὲν ἀγαθόν τι ποιοῦντας ἐργάζεσθαί τε ἔφη καὶ ἐργάτας ἀγαθοὺς εἶναι, τοὺς δὲ κυβεύοντας ἤ τι ἄλλο πονηρὸν καὶ ἐπιζήμιον ποιοῦντας ἀργοὺς ἀπεκάλει.
Now, though Socrates would fully agree that it is a benefit and a blessing to a man to be a worker, and a disadvantage and an evil to be an idler — that work, in fact, is a blessing, idleness an evil — working, being a worker, meant to him doing good work; but gambling and any occupation that is immoral and leads to loss he called idling. 

208 ἐκ δὲ τούτων ὀρθῶς ἂν ἔχοι τὸ ἔργον δ’ οὐδὲν ὄνειδος, ἀεργίη δέ τ’ ὄνειδος.
When thus interpreted there is nothing amiss with the line: "No work is a disgrace, but idleness is a disgrace."

209 τὸ δὲ Ὀμήρου ἔφη ὁ κατήγορος πολλάκις αὐτὸν λέγειν, ὅτι Ὀδυσσεὺς ὅντινα μὲν βασιλῆα καὶ ἔξοχον ἄνδρα κιχείη, τὸν δ’ ἀγανοῖς ἐπέεσσιν ἐρητύσασκε παραστάς.
Again, his accuser said that he often quoted the passage from Homer, showing how Odysseus: "Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, stood by his side, and restrained him with gentle words."

210 δαιμόνι’, οὔ σε ἔοικε κακὸν ὣς δειδίσσεσθαι, ἀλλ’ αὐτός τε κάθησο καὶ ἄλλους ἵδρυε λαούς.
211 ὃν δ’ αὖ δήμου τ’ ἄνδρα ἴδοι βοόωντά τ’ ἐφεύροι, τὸν σκήπτρῳ ἐλάσασκεν ὁμοκλήσασκέ τε μύθῳ.
212 δαιμόνι’, ἀτρέμας ἧσο, καὶ ἄλλων μῦθον ἄκουε, οἳ σέο φέρτεροί εἰσι. σὺ δ’ ἀπτόλεμος καὶ ἄναλκις, οὔτε ποτ’ ἐν πολέμῳ ἐναρίθμιος οὔτ’ ἐνὶ βουλῇ.
But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he drove with his sceptre and chid him with loud words: "Good sir, sit still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters: but thou art no warrior and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in council."

213 σὺ δ’ ἀπτόλεμος καὶ ἄναλκις, οὔτε ποτ’ ἐν πολέμῳ ἐναρίθμιος οὔτ’ ἐνὶ βουλῇ.
214 ταῦτα δὴ αὐτὸν ἐξηγεῖσθαι, ὡς ὁ ποιητὴς ἐπαινοίη παίεσθαι τοὺς δημότας καὶ πένητας.
This passage, it was said, he explained to mean that the poet approved of chastising common and poor folk.

215	Σωκράτης δ’ οὐ ταῦτ’ ἔλεγε ·
But Socrates never said that.

216	καὶ γὰρ ἑαυτὸν οὕτω γ’ ἂν ᾤετο δεῖν παίεσθαι ·
Indeed, on that view he would have thought himself worthy of chastisement.

217	ἀλλ’ ἔφη δεῖν τοὺς μήτε λόγῳ μήτ’ ἔργῳ ὠφελίμους ὄντας μήτε στρατεύματι μήτε πόλει μήτε αὐτῷ τῷ δήμῳ, εἴ τι δέοι, βοηθεῖν ἱκανούς, ἄλλως τ’ ἐὰν πρὸς τούτῳ καὶ θρασεῖς ὦσι, πάντα τρόπον κωλύεσθαι, κἂν πάνυ πλούσιοι τυγχάνωσιν ὄντες.
But what he did say was that those who render no service either by word or deed, who cannot help army or city or the people itself in time of need, ought to be stopped, even if they have riches in abundance, especially if they are insolent as well as inefficient.

218	ἀλλὰ Σωκράτης γε τ- ἐναντία τούτων φανερὸς ἦν καὶ δημοτικὸς καὶ φιλάνθρωπος ὤν.
But Socrates was just the opposite of all that, showing himself to be one of the people and a friend of mankind.

219	ἐκεῖνος γὰρ πολλοὺς ἐπιθυμητὰς καὶ ἀστοὺς καὶ ξένους λαβὼν οὐδένα πώποτε μισθὸν τῆς συνουσίας ἐπράξατο, ἀλλὰ πᾶσιν ἀφθόνως ἐπήρκει τῶν ἑαυτοῦ ·
For although he had many eager disciples among citizens and strangers, yet he never exacted a fee for his society from one of them, but of his abundance he gave without stint to all.

220	ὧν τινες μικρὰ μέρη παρ’ ἐκείνου προῖκα λαβόντες πολλοῦ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐπώλουν, καὶ οὐκ ἦσαν ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος δημοτικοί ·
Some indeed, after getting from him a few trifles for nothing, became vendors of them at a great price to others.

221	τοῖς γὰρ μὴ ἔχουσι χρήματα διδόναι οὐκ ἤθελον διαλέγεσθαι.
For they showed none of his sympathy with the people, refusing to talk with those who had no money to give them.

222	ἀλλὰ Σωκράτης γε καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους κόσμον τῇ πόλει παρεῖχε πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἢ Λίχας τῇ Λακεδαιμονίων, ὃς ὀνομαστὸς ἐπὶ τούτῳ γέγονε.
But Socrates did far more to win respect for the State in the world at large than Lichas, whose services to Sparta have made his name immortal. 

223	Λίχας μὲν γὰρ ταῖς γυμνοπαιδίαις τοὺς ἐπιδημοῦντας ἐν Λακεδαίμονι ξένους ἐδείπνιζε, Σωκράτης δὲ διὰ παντὸς τοῦ βίου τὰ ἑαυτοῦ δαπανῶν τὰ μέγιστα πάντας τοὺς βουλομένους ὠφέλει.
For Lichas used to entertain the strangers staying at Sparta during the Feast of the Dancing Boys; but Socrates spent his life in lavishing his gifts and rendering the greatest services to all who cared to receive them.

224	βελτίους γὰρ ποιῶν τοὺς συγγιγνομένους ἀπέπεμπεν.
For he always made his associates better men before he parted with them.

225	ἐμοὶ μὲν δὴ Σωκράτης τοιοῦτος ὢν ἐδόκει τιμῆς ἄξιος εἶναι τῇ πόλει μᾶλλον ἢ θανάτου.
To me, he seemed to deserve honour rather than death at the hands of the State.

226	καὶ κατὰ τοὺς νόμους δὲ σκοπῶν ἄν τις τοῦθ’ εὕροι.
And a consideration of his case in its legal aspect will confirm my opinion.

227	κατὰ γὰρ τοὺς νόμους, ἐάν τις φανερὸς γένηται κλέπτων ἢ λωποδυτῶν ἢ βαλλαντιοτομῶν ἢ τοιχωρυχῶν ἢ ἀνδραποδιζόμενος ἢ ἱεροσυλῶν, τούτοις θάνατός ἐστιν ἡ ζημία.
Under the laws, death is the penalty inflicted on persons proved to be thieves, highwaymen, cutpurses, kidnappers, robbers of temples.

228	ὧν ἐκεῖνος πάντων ἀνθρώπων πλεῖστον ἀπεῖχεν.
And from such criminals no man was so widely separated as he.

229	ἀλλὰ μὴν τῇ πόλει γε οὔτε πολέμου κακῶς συμβάντος οὔτε στάσεως οὔτε προδοσίας οὔτε ἄλλου κακοῦ οὐδενὸς πώποτε αἴτιος ἐγένετο.
Moreover, to the State he was never the cause of disaster in war, or strife or treason or any evil whatever.

230	οὐδὲ μὴν ἰδίᾳ γε οὐδένα πώποτε ἀνθρώπων οὔτε ἀγαθῶν ἀπεστέρησεν οὔτε κακοῖς περιέβαλεν, ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ αἰτίαν τῶν εἰρημένων οὐδενὸς πώποτ’ ἔσχε.
Again, in private life no man by him was ever deprived of good or involved in ill. None of these crimes was ever so much as imputed to him. 

231	πῶς οὖν ἂν ἔνοχος εἴη τῇ γραφῇ;
How then could he be guilty of the charges?

232	ὃς ἀντὶ μὲν τοῦ μὴ νομίζειν θεούς, ὡς ἐν τῇ γραφῇ ἐγέγραπτο, φανερὸς ἦν θεραπεύων τοὺς θεοὺς μάλιστα τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων, ἀντὶ δὲ τοῦ διαφθείρειν τοὺς νέους, ὃ δὴ ὁ γραψάμενος αὐτὸν ᾐτιᾶτο, φανερὸς ἦν τῶν συνόντων τοὺς πονηρὰς ἐπιθυμίας ἔχοντας τούτων μὲν παύων, τῆς δὲ καλλίστης καὶ μεγαλοπρεπεστάτης ἀρετῆς, ᾗ πόλεις τε καὶ οἶκοι εὖ οἰκοῦσι, προτρέπων ἐπιθυμεῖν.
For so far was he from rejecting the gods, as charged in the indictment, that no man was more conspicuous for his devotion to the service of the gods: so far from corrupting the youth, as his accuser actually charged against him, that if any among his companions had evil desires, he openly tried to reform them and exhorted them to desire the fairest and noblest virtue, by which men prosper in public life and in their homes.

233	ταῦτα δὲ πράττων πῶς οὐ μεγάλης ἄξιος ἦν τιμῆς τῇ πόλει;
By this conduct did he not deserve high honour from the State?

234	ὡς δὲ δὴ καὶ ὠφελεῖν ἐδόκει μοι τοὺς συνόντας τὰ μὲν ἔργῳ δεικνύων ἑαυτὸν οἷος ἦν, τὰ δὲ καὶ διαλεγόμενος, τούτων δὴ γράψω ὁπόσα ἂν διαμνημονεύσω.
In order to support my opinion that he benefited his companions, alike by actions that revealed his own character and by his conversation, I will set down what I recollect of these.

235	τὰ μὲν τοίνυν πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς φανερὸς ἦν καὶ ποιῶν καὶ λέγων ᾗπερ ἡ Πυθία ἀποκρίνεται τοῖς ἐρωτῶσι πῶς δεῖ ποιεῖν ἢ περὶ θυσίας ἢ περὶ προγόνων θεραπείας ἢ περὶ ἄλλου τινὸς τῶν τοιούτων.
First, then, for his attitude towards religion; his deeds and words were clearly in harmony with the answer given by the Priestess at Delphi to such questions as "What is my duty about sacrifice?" or about "cult of ancestors."

236	ἥ τε γὰρ Πυθία νόμῳ πόλεως ἀναιρεῖ ποιοῦντας εὐσεβῶς ἂν ποιεῖν, Σωκράτης τε οὕτω καὶ αὐτὸς ἐποίει καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις παρῄνει, τοὺς δὲ ἄλλως πως ποιοῦντας περιέργους καὶ ματαίους ἐνόμιζεν εἶναι.
For the answer of the Priestess is, "Follow the custom of the State: that is the way to act piously." And so Socrates acted himself and counselled others to act. To take any other course he considered presumption and folly.

237	καὶ ηὔχετο δὲ πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς ἁπλῶς τ- ἀγαθὰ διδόναι, ὡς τοὺς θεοὺς κάλλιστα εἰδότας ὁποῖα ἀγαθά ἐστι.
And again, when he prayed he asked simply for good gifts, "for the gods know best what things are good."

238	τοὺς δ’ εὐχομένους χρυσίον ἢ ἀργύριον ἢ τυραννίδα ἢ ἄλλο τι τῶν τοιούτων οὐδὲν διάφορον ἐνόμιζεν εὔχεσθαι ἢ εἰ κυβείαν ἢ μάχην ἢ ἄλλο τι εὔχοιντο τῶν φανερῶς ἀδήλων ὅπως ἀποβήσοιτο.
To pray for gold or silver or sovereignty or any other such thing, was just like praying for a gamble or a fight or anything of which the result is obviously uncertain.

239	θυσίας δὲ θύων μικρὰς ἀπὸ μικρῶν οὐδὲν ἡγεῖτο μειοῦσθαι τῶν ἀπὸ πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων πολλὰ καὶ μεγάλα θυόντων.
Though his sacrifices were humble, according to his means, he thought himself not a whit inferior to those who made frequent and magnificent sacrifices out of great possessions.

240	οὔτε γὰρ τοῖς θεοῖς ἔφη καλῶς ἔχειν, εἰ ταῖς μεγάλαις θυσίαις μᾶλλον ἢ ταῖς μικραῖς ἔχαιρον.
The gods (he said) could not well delight more in great offerings than in small.

241	πολλάκις γὰρ ἂν αὐτοῖς τὰ παρὰ τῶν πονηρῶν μᾶλλον ἢ τὰ παρὰ τῶν χρηστῶν εἶναι κεχαρισμένα.
For in that case must the gifts of the wicked often have found more favour in their sight than the gifts of the upright.

242	οὔτ’ ἂν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἄξιον εἶναι ζῆν, εἰ τὰ παρὰ τῶν πονηρῶν μᾶλλον ἦν κεχαρισμένα τοῖς θεοῖς ἢ τὰ παρὰ τῶν χρηστῶν.
And man would not find life worth having, if the gifts of the wicked were received with more favour by the gods than the gifts of the upright.

243	ἀλλ’ ἐνόμιζε τοὺς θεοὺς ταῖς παρὰ τῶν εὐσεβεστάτων τιμαῖς μάλιστα χαίρειν.
No, the greater the piety of the giver, the greater (he thought) was the delight of the gods in the gift.

244	ἐπαινέτης δ’ ἦν καὶ τοῦ ἔπους τούτου ·
He would quote with approval the line.

245	καδδύναμιν δ’ ἔρδειν ἱέρ’ ἀθανάτοισι θεοῖσι, καὶ πρὸς φίλους δὲ καὶ ξένους καὶ πρὸς τὴν ἄλλην δίαιταν καλὴν ἔφη παραίνεσιν εἶναι τὴν καδδύναμιν δ’ ἔρδειν.
"According to thy power render sacrifice to the immortal gods," and he would add that in our treatment of friends and strangers, and in all our behaviour, it is a noble principle to render according to our power.

246	εἰ δέ τι δόξειεν αὐτῷ σημαίνεσθαι παρὰ τῶν θεῶν, ἧττον ἂν ἐπείσθη παρὰ τὰ σημαινόμενα ποιῆσαι ἢ εἴ τις αὐτὸν ἔπειθεν ὁδοῦ λαβεῖν ἡγεμόνα τυφλὸν καὶ μὴ εἰδότα τὴν ὁδὸν ἀντὶ βλέποντος καὶ εἰδότος.
If ever any warning seemed to be given him from heaven, he would more easily have been persuaded to choose a blind guide who did not know the road in preference to one who could see and knew the way, than to disregard the admonition.

247	καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δὲ μωρίαν κατηγόρει, οἵτινες παρὰ τὰ ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν σημαινόμενα ποιοῦσί τι, φυλαττόμενοι τὴν παρὰ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἀδοξίαν.
All men, in fact, who flouted the warnings of the gods in their anxiety to avoid the censure of men, he denounced for their foolishness.

248	αὐτὸς δὲ πάντα τ- ἀνθρώπινα ὑπερεώρα πρὸς τὴν παρὰ τῶν θεῶν συμβουλίαν.
He himself despised all human opinions in comparison with counsel given by the gods.

249	διαίτῃ δὲ τήν τε ψυχὴν ἐπαίδευσε καὶ τὸ σῶμα ᾗ χρώμενος ἄν τις, εἰ μή τι δαιμόνιον εἴη, θαρραλέως καὶ ἀσφαλῶς διάγοι καὶ οὐκ ἂν ἀπορήσειε τοσαύτης δαπάνης.
He schooled his body and soul by following a system which, in all human calculation, would give him a life of confidence and security, and would make it easy to meet his expenses.

250	οὕτω γὰρ εὐτελὴς ἦν, ὥστ’ οὐκ οἶδ’ εἴ τις οὕτως ἂν ὀλίγα ἐργάζοιτο ὥστε μὴ λαμβάνειν τὰ Σωκράτει ἀρκοῦντα.
For he was so frugal that it is hardly possible to imagine a man doing so little work as not to earn enough to satisfy the needs of Socrates.

251	σίτῳ μὲν γὰρ τοσούτῳ ἐχρῆτο, ὅσον ἡδέως ἤσθιε, καὶ ἐπὶ τοῦτο οὕτω παρεσκευασμένος ᾔει ὥστε τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν τοῦ σίτου ὄψον αὐτῷ εἶναι.
He ate just sufficient food to make eating a pleasure, and he was so ready for his food that he found appetite the best sauce.

252	ποτὸν δὲ πᾶν ἡδὺ ἦν αὐτῷ διὰ τὸ μὴ πίνειν, εἰ μὴ διψῴη.
And any kind of drink he found pleasant, because he drank only when he was thirsty.

253	εἰ δέ ποτε κληθεὶς ἐθελήσειεν ἐπὶ δεῖπνον ἐλθεῖν, ὃ τοῖς πλείστοις ἐργωδέστατόν ἐστιν, ὥστε φυλάξασθαι τὸ ὑπὲρ τὸν κόρον ἐμπίμπλασθαι, τοῦτο ῥᾳδίως πάνυ ἐφυλάττετο.
Whenever he accepted an invitation to dinner, he resisted without difficulty the common temptation to exceed the limit of satiety.

254	τοῖς δὲ μὴ δυναμένοις τοῦτο ποιεῖν συνεβούλευε φυλάττεσθαι τὰ πείθοντα μὴ πεινῶντας ἐσθίειν μηδὲ διψῶντας πίνειν.
And he advised those who could not do likewise to

 avoid appetizers that encouraged them to eat and drink what they did not want.

255	καὶ γὰρ τὰ λυμαινόμενα γαστέρας καὶ κεφαλὰς καὶ ψυχὰς ταῦτ’ ἔφη εἶναι.
For such trash was the ruin of stomach and brain and soul.

256	οἴεσθαι δ’ ἔφη ἐπισκώπτων καὶ τὴν Κίρκην ὗς ποιεῖν τοιούτοις πολλοῖς δειπνίζουσαν.
I believe, he said in jest, it was by providing a feast of such things that Circe made swine.

257	τὸν δὲ Ὀδυσσέα Ἑρμοῦ τε ὑποθημοσύνῃ καὶ αὐτὸν ἐγκρατῆ ὄντα καὶ ἀποσχόμενον τοῦ ὑπὲρ τὸν κόρον τῶν τοιούτων ἅπτεσθαι, διὰ ταῦτα οὐ γενέσθαι ὗν.
And it was partly by the prompting of Hermes, partly through his own self-restraint and avoidance of excessive indulgence in such things, that Odysseus was not turned into a pig.

258	τοιαῦτα μὲν περὶ τούτων ἔπαιζεν ἅμα σπουδάζων.
This was how he would talk on the subject, half joking, half in earnest.

259	ἀφροδισίων δὲ παρῄνει τῶν καλῶν ἰσχυρῶς ἀπέχεσθαι;
Of sensual passion he would say: "Avoid it resolutely: 

260	οὐ γὰρ ἔφη ῥᾴδιον εἶναι τῶν τοιούτων ἁπτόμενον σωφρονεῖν.
it is not easy to control yourself once you meddle with that sort of thing."

261	ἀλλὰ καὶ Κριτόβουλόν ποτε τὸν Κρίτωνος πυθόμενος ὅτι ἐφίλησε τὸν Ἀλκιβιάδου υἱὸν καλὸν ὄντα, παρόντος τοῦ Κριτοβούλου ἤρετο Ξενοφῶντα.
Thus, on hearing that Critobulus had kissed Alcibiades’ pretty boy, he put this question to Xenophon before Critobulus.

262	εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Ξενοφῶν, οὐ σὺ Κριτόβουλον ἐνόμιζες εἶναι τῶν σωφρονικῶν ἀνθρώπων μᾶλλον ἢ τῶν θρασέων καὶ τῶν προνοητικῶν μᾶλλον ἢ τῶν ἀνοήτων τε καὶ ῥιψοκινδύνων;
"Tell me, Xenophon, did you not suppose Critobulus to be a sober person, and by no means rash; prudent, and not thoughtless or adventurous?"

263	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Ξενοφῶν.
"Certainly," said Xenophon.

264	νῦν τοίνυν νόμιζε αὐτὸν θερμουργότατον εἶναι καὶ λεωργότατον.
"Then you are to look on him henceforth as utterly hot-headed and reckless."

265	οὗτος κἂν εἰς μαχαίρας κυβιστήσειε κἂν εἰς πῦρ ἅλοιτο.
"The man would do a somersault into a ring of knives; he would jump into fire."

266	καὶ τί δή, ἔφη ὁ Ξενοφῶν, ἰδὼν ποιοῦντα τοιαῦτα κατέγνωκας αὐτοῦ;
"What on earth has he done to make you think so badly of him?" asked Xenophon.

267	οὐ γὰρ οὗτος, ἔφη, ἐτόλμησε τὸν Ἀλκιβιάδου υἱὸν φιλῆσαι, ὄντα εὐπροσωπότατον καὶ ὡραιότατον?
"What has the man done? He dared to kiss Alcibiades’ son, and the boy is very good-looking and attractive."

268	ἀλλ’ εἰ μέντοι, ἔφη ὁ Ξενοφῶν, τοιοῦτόν ἐστι τὸ ῥιψοκίνδυνον ἔργον, κἂν ἐγὼ δοκῶ μοι τὸν κίνδυνον τοῦτον ὑπομεῖναι.
"Oh, if that is the sort of adventure you mean, I think I might make that venture myself."

269	ὦ τλῆμον, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, καὶ τί ἂν οἴει παθεῖν καλὸν φιλήσας;
"What do you think will happen to you through kissing a pretty face?"

270	ἆρ’ οὐκ ἂν αὐτίκα μάλα δοῦλος μὲν εἶναι ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρου, πολλὰ δὲ δαπανᾶν εἰς βλαβερὰς ἡδονάς, πολλὴν δὲ ἀσχολίαν ἔχειν τοῦ ἐπιμεληθῆναί τινος καλοῦ κ- ἀγαθοῦ, σπουδάζειν δ’ ἀναγκασθῆναι ἐφ’ οἷς οὐδ’ ἂν μαινόμενος σπουδάσειεν;
"Won’t you lose your liberty in a trice and become a slave, begin spending large sums on harmful pleasures, have no time to give to anything fit for a gentleman, be forced to concern yourself with things that no madman even would care about?"

271	ὦ Ἡράκλεις, ἔφη ὁ Ξενοφῶν, ὡς δεινήν τινα λέγεις δύναμιν τοῦ φιλήματος εἶναι.
"Heracles! what alarming power in a kiss!" cried Xenophon.

272	καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, θαυμάζεις;
"What? Does that surprise you?" continued Socrates.

273	οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι τὰ φαλάγγια οὐδ’ ἡμιωβελιαῖα τὸ μέγεθος ὄντα προσαψάμενα μόνον τῷ στόματι ταῖς τε ὀδύναις ἐπιτρίβει τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ τοῦ φρονεῖν ἐξίστησι;
"Don’t you know that the scorpion, though smaller than a farthing, if it but fasten on the tongue, inflicts excruciating and maddening pain?"

274	ναὶ μὰ Δί’, ἔφη ὁ Ξενοφῶν;  

275	ἐνίησι γάρ τι τὰ φαλάγγια κατὰ τὸ δῆγμα.
"Yes, to be sure;
for the scorpion injects something by its bite," said Xenophon.

276	ὦ μῶρε, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, τοὺς δὲ καλοὺς οὐκ οἴει φιλοῦντας ἐνιέναι τι, ὅτι σὺ οὐχ ὁρᾷς;
"And do you think, you foolish fellow, that the fair inject nothing when they kiss, just because you don’t see it?"

277	οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι τοῦτο τὸ θηρίον, ὃ καλοῦσι καλὸν καὶ ὡραῖον, τοσούτῳ δεινότερόν ἐστι τῶν φαλαγγίων, ὅσῳ ἐκεῖνα μὲν ἁψάμενα, τοῦτο δὲ οὐδ’ ἁπτόμενον, ἐάν τις αὐτὸ θεᾶται, ἐνίησί τι καὶ πάνυ πρόσωθεν τοιοῦτον ὥστε μαίνεσθαι ποιεῖν;
"Don’t you know that this creature called ‘fair and young’ is more dangerous than the scorpion, seeing that it need not even come in contact, like the insect, but at any distance can inject a maddening poison into anyone who only looks at it?"

278	ἴσως δὲ καὶ οἱ ἔρωτες τοξόται διὰ τοῦτο καλοῦνται, ὅτι καὶ πρόσωθεν οἱ καλοὶ τιτρώσκουσιν.
"Maybe, too, the loves are called archers for this reason, that the fair can wound even at a distance."

279	ἀλλὰ συμβουλεύω σοι, ὦ Ξενοφῶν, ὁπόταν ἴδῃς τινὰ καλόν, φεύγειν προτροπάδην.
"Nay, I advise you, Xenophon, as soon as you see a pretty face to take to your heels and fly."

280	σοὶ δ’, ὦ Κριτόβουλε, συμβουλεύω ἀπενιαυτίσαι· 
"And you, Critobulus, I advise to spend a year abroad. 

281	μόλις γὰρ ἂν ἴσως ἐν τοσούτῳ χρόνῳ τὸ δῆγμα ὑγιὴς γένοιο.
It will certainly take you at least as long as that to recover from the bite."

282	οὕτω δὴ καὶ ἀφροδισιάζειν τοὺς μὴ ἀσφαλῶς ἔχοντας πρὸς ἀφροδίσια ᾤετο χρῆναι πρὸς τοιαῦτα , οἷα μὴ πάνυ μὲν δεομένου τοῦ σώματος οὐκ ἂν προσδέξαιτο ἡ ψυχή , δεομένου δὲ οὐκ ἂν πράγματα παρέχοι .
Thus in the matter of carnal appetite, he held that those whose passions were not under complete control should limit themselves to such indulgence as the soul would reject unless the need of the body were pressing, and such as would do no harm when the need was there.

283	αὐτὸς δὲ πρὸς ταῦτα φανερὸς ἦν οὕτω παρεσκευασμένος ὥστε ῥᾷον ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν καλλίστων καὶ ὡραιοτάτων ἢ οἱ ἄλλοι τῶν αἰσχίστων καὶ ἀωροτάτων .
As for his own conduct in this matter, it was evident that he had trained himself to avoid the fairest and most attractive more easily than others avoid the ugliest and most repulsive.

284	περὶ μὲν δὴ βρώσεως καὶ πόσεως καὶ ἀφροδισίων οὕτω κατεσκευασμένος ἦν καὶ ᾤετο οὐδὲν ἂν ἧττον ἀρκούντως ἥδεσθαι τῶν πολλὰ ἐπὶ τούτοις πραγματευομένων , λυπεῖσθαι δὲ πολὺ ἔλαττον .
Concerning eating and drinking then and carnal indulgence such were his views, and he thought that a due portion of pleasure would be no more lacking to him than to those who give themselves much to these, and that much less trouble would fall to his lot.

285	εἰ δέ τινες Σωκράτην νομίζουσιν , ὡς ἔνιοι γράφουσί τε καὶ λέγουσι περὶ αὐτοῦ τεκμαιρόμενοι , προτρέψασθαι μὲν ἀνθρώπους ἐπ’ ἀρετὴν κράτιστον γεγονέναι , προαγαγεῖν δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτὴν οὐχ ἱκανόν , σκεψάμενοι μὴ μόνον ἃ ἐκεῖνος κολαστηρίου ἕνεκα τοὺς πάντ’ οἰομένους εἰδέναι ἐρωτῶν ἤλεγχεν , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἃ λέγων συνημέρευε τοῖς συνδιατρίβουσι , δοκιμαζόντων εἰ ἱκανὸς ἦν βελτίους ποιεῖν τοὺς συνόντας .
If any hold the opinion expressed in some written and spoken criticisms of Socrates that are based on inference, and think, that though he was consummate in exhorting men to virtue, he was an incompetent guide to it, let them consider not only the searching cross-examination with which he chastised those who thought themselves omniscient, but his daily talks with his familiar friends, and then judge whether he was capable of improving his companions.

286	λέξω δὲ πρῶτον ἅ ποτε αὐτοῦ ἤκουσα περὶ τοῦ δαιμονίου διαλεγομένου πρὸς Ἀριστόδημον τὸν μικρὸν ἐπικαλούμενον .
I will first state what I once heard him say about the godhead in conversation with Aristodemus the dwarf, as he was called.

287	καταμαθὼν γὰρ αὐτὸν οὔτε θύοντα τοῖς θεοῖς οὔτε μαντικῇ χρώμενον , ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ποιούντων ταῦτα καταγελῶντα , εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Ἀριστόδημε , ἔστιν οὕστινας ἀνθρώπους τεθαύμακας ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ ;
On learning that he was not known to sacrifice or pray or use divination, and actually made a mock of those who did so, he said: Tell me, Aristodemus, do you admire any human beings for wisdom?

288	ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
I do, he answered.

289	καὶ ὅς , λέξον ἡμῖν , ἔφη , τὰ ὀνόματα αὐτῶν .
Tell us their names.

290	ἐπὶ μὲν τοίνυν ἐπῶν ποιήσει Ὅμηρον ἔγωγε μάλιστα τεθαύμακα , ἐπὶ δὲ διθυράμβῳ Μελανιππίδην , ἐπὶ δὲ τραγῳδίᾳ Σοφοκλέα , ἐπὶ δὲ ἀνδριαντοποιίᾳ Πολύκλειτον , ἐπὶ δὲ ζωγραφίᾳ Ζεῦξιν .
In epic poetry Homer comes first, in my opinion; in dithyramb, Melanippides; in tragedy, Sophocles; in sculpture, Polycleitus; in painting, Zeuxis.

291	πότερά σοι δοκοῦσιν οἱ ἀπεργαζόμενοι εἴδωλα ἄφρονά τε καὶ ἀκίνητα ἀξιοθαυμαστότεροι εἶναι ἢ οἱ ζῷα ἔμφρονά τε καὶ ἐνεργά;
Which, think you, deserve the greater admiration, the creators of phantoms without sense and motion, or the creators of living, intelligent, and active beings?

292	πολὺ νὴ Δία οἱ ζῷα, εἴπερ γε μὴ τύχῃ τινί, ἀλλ’ ὑπὸ γνώμης ταῦτα γίγνεται.
Oh, of living beings, by far, provided only they are created by design and not mere chance.

293	τῶν δὲ ἀτεκμάρτως ἐχόντων ὅτου ἕνεκα ἔστι καὶ τῶν φανερῶς ἐπ’ ὠφελείᾳ ὄντων πότερα τύχης καὶ πότερα γνώμης ἔργα κρίνεις;
Suppose that it is impossible to guess the purpose of one creature’s existence, and obvious that another’s serves a useful end, which, in your judgment, is the work of chance, and which of design?

294	πρέπει μὲν τὰ ἐπ’ ὠφελείᾳ γιγνόμενα γνώμης εἶναι ἔργα.
Presumably the creature that serves some useful end is the work of design.

295	οὐκοῦν δοκεῖ σοι ὁ ἐξ ἀρχῆς ποιῶν ἀνθρώπους ἐπ’ ὠφελείᾳ προσθεῖναι αὐτοῖς δι’ ὧν αἰσθάνονται ἕκαστα, ὀφθαλμοὺς μὲν ὥσθ’ ὁρᾶν τὰ ὁρατά, ὦτα δὲ ὥστ’ ἀκούειν τὰ ἀκουστά;
Do you not think then that he who created man from the beginning had some useful end in view when he endowed him with his several senses, giving eyes to see visible objects, ears to hear sounds?


296 ὀσμῶν γε μήν, εἰ μὴ ῥῖνες προσετέθησαν, τί ἂν ἡμῖν ὄφελος ἦν;
Would odours again be of any use to us had we not been endowed with nostrils?

297 τίς δ’ ἂν αἴσθησις ἦν γλυκέων καὶ δριμέων καὶ πάντων τῶν διὰ στόματος ἡδέων, εἰ μὴ γλῶττα τούτων γνώμων ἐνειργάσθη;
What perception should we have of sweet and bitter and all things pleasant to the palate had we no tongue in our mouth to discriminate between them?

298 πρὸς δὲ τούτοις οὐ δοκεῖ σοι καὶ τάδε προνοίας ἔργοις ἐοικέναι, τὸ ἐπεὶ ἀσθενὴς μέν ἐστιν ἡ ὄψις, βλεφάροις αὐτὴν θυρῶσαι, ἅ, ὅταν μὲν αὐτῇ χρῆσθαί τι δέῃ, ἀναπετάννυται, ἐν δὲ τῷ ὕπνῳ συγκλείεται, ὡς δ’ ἂν μηδὲ ἄνεμοι βλάπτωσιν, ἡθμὸν βλεφαρίδας ἐμφῦσαι, ὀφρύσι τε ἀπογεισῶσαι τὰ ὑπὲρ τῶν ὀμμάτων, ὡς μηδ’ ὁ ἐκ τῆς κεφαλῆς ἱδρὼς κακουργῇ;
Besides these, are there not other contrivances that look like the results of forethought? Thus the eyeballs, being weak, are set behind eyelids, that open like doors when we want to see, and close when we sleep: on the lids grow lashes through which the very winds filter harmlessly: above the eyes is a coping of brows that lets no drop of sweat from the head hurt them.

299 τὸ δὲ τὴν ἀκοὴν δέχεσθαι μὲν πάσας φωνάς, ἐμπίμπλασθαι δὲ μήποτε;
The ears catch all sounds, but are never choked with them.

300 καὶ τοὺς μὲν πρόσθεν ὀδόντας πᾶσι ζῴοις οἵους τέμνειν εἶναι, τοὺς δὲ γομφίους οἵους παρὰ τούτων δεξαμένους λεαίνειν;
Again, the incisors of all creatures are adapted for cutting, the molars for receiving food from them and grinding it.

301 καὶ στόμα μέν, δι’ οὗ ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖ τὰ ζῷα εἰσπέμπεται, πλησίον ὀφθαλμῶν καὶ ῥινῶν καταθεῖναι;
And again, the mouth, through which the food they want goes in, is set near the eyes and nostrils.

302 ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ ἀποχωροῦντα δυσχερῆ, ἀποστρέψαι τοὺς τούτων ὀχετοὺς καὶ ἀπενεγκεῖν ᾗ δυνατὸν προσωτάτω ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθήσεων;
But since what goes out is unpleasant, the ducts through which it passes are turned away and removed as far as possible from the organs of sense.

303 ταῦτα οὕτω προνοητικῶς πεπραγμένα ἀπορεῖς πότερα τύχης ἢ γνώμης ἔργα ἐστίν;
With such signs of forethought in these arrangements, can you doubt whether they are the works of chance or design?

304 οὐ μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, ἀλλ’ οὕτω γε σκοπουμένῳ πάνυ ἔοικε ταῦτα σοφοῦ τινος δημιουργοῦ καὶ φιλοζῴου τεχνήμασι.
"No, of course not," he said, "but when I regard them in this light they do look very like the handiwork of a wise and loving creator."

305 τὸ δὲ ἐμφῦσαι μὲν ἔρωτα τῆς τεκνοποιίας, ἐμφῦσαι δὲ ταῖς γειναμέναις ἔρωτα τοῦ ἐκτρέφειν, τοῖς δὲ τραφεῖσι μέγιστον μὲν πόθον τοῦ ζῆν, μέγιστον δὲ φόβον τοῦ θανάτου;
"What of the natural desire to beget children, the mother’s desire to rear her babe, the child’s strong will to live and strong fear of death?"

306 ἀμέλει καὶ ταῦτα ἔοικε μηχανήμασί τινος ζῷα εἶναι βουλευσαμένου.
"Undoubtedly these, too, look like the contrivances of one who deliberately willed the existence of living creatures."

307 σὺ δὲ σαυτῷ δοκεῖς τι φρόνιμον ἔχειν;
"Do you think you have any wisdom yourself?"

308 ἐρώτα γοῦν καὶ ἀποκρινοῦμαι.
"Oh! Ask me a question and judge from my answer."

309 ἄλλοθι δὲ οὐδαμοῦ οὐδὲν οἴει φρόνιμον εἶναι;
"And do you suppose that wisdom is nowhere else to be found,

310 καὶ ταῦτ’ εἰδὼς ὅτι γῆς τε μικρὸν μέρος ἐν τῷ σώματι πολλῆς οὔσης ἔχεις καὶ ὑγροῦ βραχὺ πολλοῦ ὄντος καὶ τῶν ἄλλων δήπου μεγάλων ὄντων ἑκάστου μικρὸν μέρος λαβόντι τὸ σῶμα συνήρμοσταί σοι;
although you know that you have a mere speck of all the earth in your body and a mere drop of all the water, and that of all the other mighty elements you received, I suppose, just a scrap towards the fashioning of your body?"


311 νοῦν δὲ μόνον ἄρα οὐδαμοῦ ὄντα σε εὐτυχῶς πως δοκεῖς συναρπάσαι, καὶ τάδε τὰ ὑπερμεγέθη καὶ πλῆθος ἄπειρα δι’ ἀφροσύνην τινά, ὡς οἴει, εὐτάκτως ἔχειν;
"But as for mind, which alone, it seems, is without mass, do you think that you snapped it up by a lucky accident, and that the orderly ranks of all these huge masses, infinite in number, are due, forsooth, to a sort of absurdity?"


312 μὰ Δί’ οὐ γὰρ ὁρῶ τοὺς κυρίους, ὥσπερ τῶν ἐνθάδε γιγνομένων τοὺς δημιουργούς.
"Yes; for I don’t see the master hand, whereas I see the makers of things in this world."


313 οὐδὲ γὰρ τὴν σαυτοῦ σύγε ψυχὴν ὁρᾷς, ἣ τοῦ σώματος κυρία ἐστίν;
"Neither do you see your own soul, which has the mastery of the body; 

314 ὥστε κατά γε τοῦτο ἔξεστί σοι λέγειν, ὅτι οὐδὲν γνώμῃ, ἀλλὰ τύχῃ πάντα πράττεις.
so that, as far as that goes, you may say that you do nothing by design, but everything by chance." 

315 καὶ ὁ Ἀριστόδημος, οὔτοι, ἔφη, ἐγώ, ὦ Σώκρατες, ὑπερορῶ τὸ δαιμόνιον, ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖνο μεγαλοπρεπέστερον ἡγοῦμαι ἢ ὡς τῆς ἐμῆς θεραπείας προσδεῖσθαι.
Here Aristodemus exclaimed: "Really, Socrates, I don’t despise the godhead. But I think it is too great to need my service." 

316 οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, ὅσῳ μεγαλοπρεπέστερον ὂν ἀξιοῖ σε θεραπεύειν, τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον τιμητέον αὐτό.
"So, the greater the power that deigns to serve you, the more honor it demands of you," Socrates replied.

Continuing from Greek sentence 317:

317 εὖ ἴσθι , ἔφη , ὅτι , εἰ νομίζοιμι θεοὺς ἀνθρώπων τι φροντίζειν , οὐκ ἂν ἀμελοίην αὐτῶν .
"Rest assured," he said, "if I thought that the gods took any care of men, I would not neglect them."

318 ἔπειτ’ οὐκ οἴει φροντίζειν ;
"Then do you think they do not care?"

319 οἳ πρῶτον μὲν μόνον τῶν ζῴων ἄνθρωπον ὀρθὸν ἀνέστησαν ·
"They, who of all creatures made only man stand upright."

320 ἡ δὲ ὀρθότης καὶ προορᾶν πλέον ποιεῖ δύνασθαι καὶ τὰ ὕπερθεν μᾶλλον θεᾶσθαι καὶ ἧττον κακοπαθεῖν καὶ ὄψιν καὶ ἀκοὴν καὶ στόμα ἐνεποίησαν ·
"This erect posture enables him to see farther, to observe things above, and lessens his suffering; and for him they created vision, hearing, and speech."

321 ἔπειτα τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἑρπετοῖς πόδας ἔδωκαν , οἳ τὸ πορεύεσθαι μόνον παρέχουσιν , ἀνθρώπῳ δὲ καὶ χεῖρας προσέθεσαν , αἳ τὰ πλεῖστα οἷς εὐδαιμονέστεροι ἐκείνων ἐσμὲν ἐξεργάζονται .
"Then, to other creeping creatures they gave feet, which only enable movement, but to man they added hands, which are instruments for our greater happiness."

322 καὶ μὴν γλῶττάν γε πάντων τῶν ζῴων ἐχόντων , μόνην τὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐποίησαν οἵαν ἄλλοτε ἀλλαχῇ ψαύουσαν τοῦ στόματος ἀρθροῦν τε τὴν φωνὴν καὶ σημαίνειν πάντα ἀλλήλοις ἃ βουλόμεθα .
"And though all animals have a tongue, only man's tongue has the ability to articulate speech and express all our desires to each other."

323 τὸ δὲ καὶ τὰς τῶν ἀφροδισίων ἡδονὰς τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ζῴοις δοῦναι περιγράψαντας τοῦ ἔτους χρόνον , ἡμῖν δὲ συνεχῶς μέχρι γήρως ταῦτα παρέχειν .
"Furthermore, while limiting sexual pleasures to a certain season for other animals, for humans they provided it continuously up to old age."

324 οὐ τοίνυν μόνον ἤρκεσε τῷ θεῷ τοῦ σώματος ἐπιμεληθῆναι , ἀλλ’ , ὅπερ μέγιστόν ἐστι , καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν κρατίστην τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐνέφυσε .
"So it was not enough for the deity to care for the body; he also imparted to man the noblest soul, which is of utmost importance."

325 τίνος γὰρ ἄλλου ζῴου ψυχὴ πρῶτα μὲν θεῶν τῶν τὰ μέγιστα καὶ κάλλιστα συνταξάντων ᾔσθηται ὅτι εἰσί ;
"For what other animal's soul is aware, first and foremost, of the gods who have ordained the greatest and fairest things?"

326 τί δὲ φῦλον ἄλλο ἢ ἄνθρωποι θεοὺς θεραπεύουσι ;
"And what race other than humans worships the gods?"

327 ποία δὲ ψυχὴ τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἱκανωτέρα προφυλάττεσθαι ἢ λιμὸν ἢ δίψος ἢ ψύχη ἢ θάλπη , ἢ νόσοις ἐπικουρῆσαι , ἢ ῥώμην ἀσκῆσαι , ἢ πρὸς μάθησιν ἐκπονῆσαι , ἢ ὅσα ἂν ἀκούσῃ ἢ ἴδῃ ἢ μάθῃ ἱκανωτέρα ἐστὶ διαμεμνῆσθαι ;
"And which soul, other than the human soul, is more capable of guarding against hunger, thirst, cold, heat, to heal sickness, to develop strength, to toil for learning, and to remember accurately all that it hears, sees, or learns?"

Continuing from Greek sentence 317:

317 εὖ ἴσθι, ἔφη, ὅτι, εἰ νομίζοιμι θεοὺς ἀνθρώπων τι φροντίζειν, οὐκ ἂν ἀμελοίην αὐτῶν.
"Rest assured," he said, "if I thought that the gods took any care of men, I would not neglect them."

318 ἔπειτ’ οὐκ οἴει φροντίζειν;
"Then do you think they do not care?"

319 οἳ πρῶτον μὲν μόνον τῶν ζῴων ἄνθρωπον ὀρθὸν ἀνέστησαν;
"They, who of all creatures made only man stand upright."

320 ἡ δὲ ὀρθότης καὶ προορᾶν πλέον ποιεῖ δύνασθαι καὶ τὰ ὕπερθεν μᾶλλον θεᾶσθαι καὶ ἧττον κακοπαθεῖν καὶ ὄψιν καὶ ἀκοὴν καὶ στόμα ἐνεποίησαν;
"This upright posture enables him to see farther, to observe things above, and lessens his suffering; and for him they created vision, hearing, and speech."

321 ἔπειτα τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἑρπετοῖς πόδας ἔδωκαν, οἳ τὸ πορεύεσθαι μόνον παρέχουσιν, ἀνθρώπῳ δὲ καὶ χεῖρας προσέθεσαν, αἳ τὰ πλεῖστα οἷς εὐδαιμονέστεροι ἐκείνων ἐσμὲν ἐξεργάζονται.
"Then, to other creeping creatures they gave feet, which only enable movement, but to man they added hands, which are instruments for our greater happiness."

322 καὶ μὴν γλῶττάν γε πάντων τῶν ζῴων ἐχόντων, μόνην τὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐποίησαν οἵαν ἄλλοτε ἀλλαχῇ ψαύουσαν τοῦ στόματος ἀρθροῦν τε τὴν φωνὴν καὶ σημαίνειν πάντα ἀλλήλοις ἃ βουλόμεθα.
"And though all animals have a tongue, the tongue of man alone has been formed by them to be capable of contact with different parts of the mouth, so as to enable us to articulate the voice and express all our wants to one another."

323 τὸ δὲ καὶ τὰς τῶν ἀφροδισίων ἡδονὰς τοῖς μὲν

 ἄλλοις ζῴοις δοῦναι περιγράψαντας τοῦ ἔτους χρόνον, ἡμῖν δὲ συνεχῶς μέχρι γήρως ταῦτα παρέχειν.
"Furthermore, while limiting sexual pleasures to a certain season for other animals, for humans they provided it continuously up to old age."

324 οὐ τοίνυν μόνον ἤρκεσε τῷ θεῷ τοῦ σώματος ἐπιμεληθῆναι, ἀλλ’, ὅπερ μέγιστόν ἐστι, καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν κρατίστην τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ἐνέφυσε.
"So it was not enough for the deity to care for the body; he also imparted to man the noblest soul, which is of utmost importance."

325 τίνος γὰρ ἄλλου ζῴου ψυχὴ πρῶτα μὲν θεῶν τῶν τὰ μέγιστα καὶ κάλλιστα συνταξάντων ᾔσθηται ὅτι εἰσί;
"For what other animal's soul is aware, first and foremost, of the gods who have ordained the greatest and fairest things?"

326 τί δὲ φῦλον ἄλλο ἢ ἄνθρωποι θεοὺς θεραπεύουσι;
"And what race other than humans worships the gods?"

327 ποία δὲ ψυχὴ τῆς ἀνθρωπίνης ἱκανωτέρα προφυλάττεσθαι ἢ λιμὸν ἢ δίψος ἢ ψύχη ἢ θάλπη, ἢ νόσοις ἐπικουρῆσαι, ἢ ῥώμην ἀσκῆσαι, ἢ πρὸς μάθησιν ἐκπονῆσαι, ἢ ὅσα ἂν ἀκούσῃ ἢ ἴδῃ ἢ μάθῃ ἱκανωτέρα ἐστὶ διαμεμνῆσθαι;
"And which soul, other than the human soul, is more capable of guarding against hunger, thirst, cold, heat, to heal sickness, to develop strength, to toil for learning, and to remember accurately all that it hears, sees, or learns?"

328 οὐ γὰρ πάνυ σοι κατάδηλον ὅτι παρὰ τ- ἄλλα ζῷα ὥσπερ θεοὶ ἄνθρωποι βιοτεύουσι, φύσει καὶ τῷ σώματι καὶ τῇ ψυχῇ κρατιστεύοντες;
"Is it not quite clear to you that compared to other animals, humans live as if they were gods, surpassing in nature, body, and soul?"

329 οὔτε γὰρ βοὸς ἂν ἔχων σῶμα, ἀνθρώπου δὲ γνώμην ἐδύνατ’ ἂν πράττειν ἃ ἐβούλετο, οὔθ’ ὅσα χεῖρας ἔχει, ἄφρονα δ’ ἐστί, πλέον οὐδὲν ἔχει.
"For neither could a creature with an ox's body and a man's intellect carry out his desires, nor one with hands but without reason achieve more."

330 σὺ δ’ ἀμφοτέρων τῶν πλείστου ἀξίων τετυχηκὼς οὐκ οἴει σοῦ θεοὺς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι;
"Do you, having received the two most valuable gifts, not think that the gods take care of you?"

331 ἀλλ’ ὅταν τί ποιήσωσι, νομιεῖς αὐτοὺς σοῦ φροντίζειν;
"But when they do something, do you think they care for you?"

332 ὅταν πέμπωσιν, ὥσπερ σὺ φὴς πέμπειν αὐτούς, συμβούλους ὅ τι χρὴ ποιεῖν καὶ μὴ ποιεῖν.
"When they send, as you claim they do, counsellors to advise what to do and what not to do."

333 ὅταν δὲ Ἀθηναίοις, ἔφη, πυνθανομένοις τι διὰ μαντικῆς φράζωσιν, οὐ καὶ σοὶ δοκεῖς φράζειν αὐτούς, οὐδ’ ὅταν τοῖς Ἕλλησι τέρατα πέμποντες προσημαίνωσιν, οὐδ’ ὅταν πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις, ἀλλὰ μόνον σὲ ἐξαιροῦντες ἐν ἀμελείᾳ κατατίθενται;
"And when the Athenians, through divination, seek guidance and they provide answers, do you not think they also guide you? Or when they send omens to the Greeks or to all mankind? Do you think they neglect everyone but you?"

Continuing from Greek sentence 334:

334 οἴει δ’ ἂν τοὺς θεοὺς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις δόξαν ἐμφῦσαι ὡς ἱκανοί εἰσιν εὖ καὶ κακῶς ποιεῖν, εἰ μὴ δυνατοὶ ἦσαν, καὶ ἀνθρώπους ἐξαπατωμένους τὸν πάντα χρόνον οὐδέποτ’ ἂν αἰσθέσθαι;
"Do you really think the gods would instill in humans the belief that they have the power to do good or harm if they weren't capable of it, and that humans would be deceived all this time without ever realizing it?"

335 οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι τὰ πολυχρονιώτατα καὶ σοφώτατα τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων, πόλεις καὶ ἔθνη, θεοσεβέστατά ἐστι, καὶ αἱ φρονιμώταται ἡλικίαι θεῶν ἐπιμελέσταται;
"Don't you see that the most enduring and wisest of human institutions, such as cities and nations, are the most devout in worshipping gods, and the most sensible people are the most attentive to the gods?"

336 ὠγαθέ, ἔφη, κατάμαθε ὅτι καὶ ὁ σὸς νοῦς ἐνὼν τὸ σὸν σῶμα ὅπως βούλεται μεταχειρίζεται.
"O good man, understand that just as your mind, residing within your body, uses it as it wishes, so it is with these things."

337 οἴεσθαι οὖν χρὴ καὶ τὴν ἐν τῷ παντὶ φρόνησιν τὰ πάντα, ὅπως ἂν αὐτῇ ἡδὺ ᾖ, οὕτω τίθεσθαι, καὶ μὴ τὸ σὸν μὲν ὄμμα δύνασθαι ἐπὶ πολλὰ στάδια ἐξικνεῖσθαι, τὸν δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ὀφθαλμὸν ἀδύνατον εἶναι ἅμα πάντα ὁρᾶν, μηδὲ τὴν σὴν μὲν ψυχὴν καὶ περὶ τῶν ἐνθάδε καὶ περὶ τῶν ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ ἐν Σικελίᾳ δύνασθαι φροντίζειν, τὴν δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ φρόνησιν μὴ ἱκανὴν εἶναι ἅμα πάντων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι.
"So, do you believe that the wisdom within the universe arranges all things as it pleases, and that while your own eye can reach over many miles, God's eye cannot see everything at once? And that your own soul can concern itself with things here and in Egypt and Sicily, but the wisdom of God is not capable of caring for everything simultaneously?"


338 ἂν μέντοι, ὥσπερ ἀνθρώπους θεραπεύων γιγνώσκεις τοὺς ἀντιθεραπεύειν ἐθέλοντας καὶ χαριζόμενος τοὺς ἀντιχαριζομένους καὶ συμβουλευόμενος καταμανθάνεις τοὺς φρονίμους, οὕτω καὶ τῶν θεῶν πεῖραν λαμβάνῃς θεραπεύων, εἴ τί σοι θελήσουσι περὶ τῶν ἀδήλων ἀνθρώποις συμβουλεύειν, γνώσει τὸ θεῖον ὅτι τοσοῦτον καὶ τοιοῦτόν ἐστιν ὥσθ’ ἅμα πάντα ὁρᾶν καὶ πάντα ἀκούειν καὶ πανταχοῦ παρεῖναι καὶ ἅμα πάντων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι αὐτούς.
Similarly, just as you recognize those who reciprocate your service, show kindness to those who are kind to you, and discern the wise by seeking their counsel, try serving the gods and observe whether they offer you guidance in matters hidden from humans. Then you will understand the divine nature, so great and such that it can see and hear all things, be everywhere at once, and be mindful of everything.

339 ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν ταῦτα λέγων οὐ μόνον τοὺς συνόντας ἐδόκει ποιεῖν ὁπότε ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ὁρῷντο, ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν ἀνοσίων τε καὶ ἀδίκων καὶ αἰσχρῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὁπότε ἐν ἐρημίᾳ εἶεν, ἐπείπερ ἡγήσαιντο μηδὲν ἄν ποτε ὧν πράττοιεν θεοὺς διαλαθεῖν.
In saying these things, he not only encouraged those present to abstain from impious, unjust, and shameful actions when observed by others, but even when alone, as they were convinced that nothing they did could ever escape the notice of the gods.

340 εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ ἐγκράτεια καλόν τε κ- ἀγαθὸν ἀνδρὶ κτῆμά ἐστιν, ἐπισκεψώμεθα εἴ τι προυβίβαζε λέγων εἰς ταύτην τοιάδε; ὦ ἄνδρες, εἰ πολέμου ἡμῖν γενομένου βουλοίμεθα ἑλέσθαι ἄνδρα, ὑφ’ οὗ μάλιστ’ ἂν αὐτοὶ μὲν σῳζοίμεθα, τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους χειροίμεθα, ἆρ’ ὅντινα ἂν αἰσθανοίμεθα ἥττω γαστρὸς ἢ οἴνου ἢ ἀφροδισίων ἢ πόνου ἢ ὕπνου, τοῦτον ἂν αἱροίμεθα; καὶ πῶς ἂν οἰηθείημεν τὸν τοιοῦτον ἢ ἡμᾶς σῶσαι ἢ τοὺς πολεμίους κρατῆσαι;
If self-control is indeed a valuable and noble possession for a man, let us consider if he led them toward this virtue with words like these: 'Men, if in a war we needed to choose a leader under whom we could be saved and conquer our enemies, would we select someone who is less dominated by hunger, wine, lust, toil, or sleep? How could we then expect such a person to save us or defeat our enemies?'

341 ὦ ἄνδρες, εἰ πολέμου ἡμῖν γενομένου βουλοίμεθα ἑλέσθαι ἄνδρα, ὑφ’ οὗ μάλιστ’ ἂν αὐτοὶ μὲν σῳζοίμεθα, τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους χειροίμεθα, ἆρ’ ὅντινα ἂν αἰσθανοίμεθα ἥττω γαστρὸς ἢ οἴνου ἢ ἀφροδισίων ἢ πόνου ἢ ὕπνου, τοῦτον ἂν αἱροίμεθα;


My friends, if we were at war and wanted to choose a leader most capable of helping us to save ourselves and conquer the enemy, should we choose one whom we knew to be the slave of the belly, or of wine, or lust, or sleep? How could we expect that such an one would either save us or defeat the enemy?

342 καὶ πῶς ἂν οἰηθείημεν τὸν τοιοῦτον ἢ ἡμᾶς σῶσαι ἢ τοὺς πολεμίους κρατῆσαι;


How could we expect that such an one would either save us or defeat the enemy?

343 εἰ δ’ ἐπὶ τελευτῇ τοῦ βίου γενόμενοι βουλοίμεθά τῳ ἐπιτρέψαι ἢ παῖδας ἄρρενας παιδεῦσαι ἢ θυγατέρας παρθένους διαφυλάξαι ἢ χρήματα διασῶσαι, ἆρ’ ἀξιόπιστον εἰς ταῦθ’ ἡγησόμεθα τὸν ἀκρατῆ;


Or if at the end of our life we should wish to appoint a guardian to educate our boys or protect our girls or to take care of our goods, should we think a loose liver a trustworthy man to choose?

344 δούλῳ δ’ ἀκρατεῖ ἐπιτρέψαιμεν ἂν ἢ βοσκήματα ἢ ταμιεῖα ἢ ἔργων ἐπιστασίαν;


Should we entrust live stock or storehouses or the management of works to a vicious slave?

345 διάκονον δὲ καὶ ἀγοραστὴν τοιοῦτον ἐθελήσαιμεν ἂν προῖκα λαβεῖν;


Should we be willing to take as a gift a page or an errandboy with such a character?

346 ἀλλὰ μὴν εἴ γε μηδὲ δοῦλον ἀκρατῆ δεξαίμεθ’ ἄν, πῶς οὐκ ἄξιον αὐτόν γε φυλάξασθαι τοιοῦτον γενέσθαι;


Surely then, if we should refuse a vicious slave, the master must look to it that he does not grow vicious himself?

347 καὶ γὰρ οὐχ ὥσπερ οἱ πλεονέκται τῶν ἄλλων ἀφαιρούμενοι χρήματα ἑαυτοὺς δοκοῦσι πλουτίζειν, οὕτως ὁ ἀκρατὴς τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις βλαβερός, ἑαυτῷ δ’ ὠφέλιμος, ἀλλὰ κακοῦργος μὲν τῶν ἄλλων, ἑαυτοῦ δὲ πολὺ κακουργότερος, εἴ γε κακουργότατόν ἐστι μὴ μόνον τὸν οἶκον τὸν ἑαυτοῦ φθείρειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὴν ψυχήν;


For whereas the covetous, by robbing other men of their goods, seem to enrich themselves, a vicious man reaps no advantage from the harm he does to others. If he is a worker of mischief to others, he brings much greater mischief on himself, if indeed the greatest mischief of all is to ruin not one’s home merely, but the body and the soul.

348 ἐν συνουσίᾳ δὲ τίς ἂν ἡσθείη τῷ τοιούτῳ, ὃν εἰδείη τῷ ὄψῳ τε καὶ τῷ οἴνῳ χαίροντα μᾶλλον ἢ τοῖς φίλοις καὶ τὰς πόρνας ἀγαπῶντα μᾶλλον ἢ τοὺς ἑταίρους;


In social intercourse what pleasure could you find in such a man, knowing that he prefers your sauces and your wines to your friends, and likes the women better than the company?

349 ἆρά γε οὐ χρὴ πάντα ἄνδρα, ἡγησάμενον τὴν ἐγκράτειαν ἀρετῆς εἶναι κρηπῖδα, ταύτην πρῶτον ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ κατασκευάσασθαι;


Should not every man hold self-control to be the foundation of all virtue, and first lay this foundation firmly in his soul?

350 τίς γὰρ ἄνευ ταύτης ἢ μάθοι τι ἂν ἀγαθὸν ἢ μελετήσειεν ἀξιολόγως;


For who without this can learn any good or practise it worthily?

351 ἢ τίς οὐκ ἂν ταῖς ἡδοναῖς δουλεύων αἰσχρῶς διατεθείη καὶ τὸ σῶμα καὶ τὴν ψυχήν;


Or what man that is the slave of his pleasures is not in an evil plight body and soul alike?

352 ἐμοὶ μὲν δοκεῖ νὴ τὴν Ἥραν ἐλευθέρῳ μὲν ἀνδρὶ εὐκτὸν εἶναι μὴ τυχεῖν δούλου τοιούτου, δουλεύοντα δὲ ταῖς τοιαύταις ἡδοναῖς ἱκετευτέον τοὺς θεοὺς δεσποτῶν ἀγαθῶν τυχεῖν;


From my heart I declare that every free man should pray not to have such a man among his slaves; and every man who is a slave to such pleasures should entreat the gods to give him good masters: thus, and only thus, may he find salvation.

353 οὕτω γὰρ ἂν μόνως ὁ τοιοῦτος σωθείη.


Thus, and only thus, may he find salvation.

354 τοιαῦτα δὲ λέγων ἔτι ἐγκρατέστερον τοῖς ἔργοις ἢ τοῖς λόγοις ἑαυτὸν ἐπεδείκνυεν ·
Such were his words; but his own self-control was shown yet more clearly by his deeds than by his words.

355 οὐ γὰρ μόνον τῶν διὰ τοῦ σώματος ἡδονῶν ἐκράτει, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῆς διὰ τῶν χρημάτων, νομίζων τὸν παρὰ τοῦ τυχόντος χρήματα λαμβάνοντα δεσπότην ἑαυτοῦ καθιστάναι καὶ δουλεύειν δουλείαν οὐδεμιᾶς ἧττον αἰσχράν.
For he kept in subjection not only the pleasures of the body, but those too that money brings, in the belief that he who takes money from any casual giver puts himself under a master and endures the basest form of slavery.

356 ἄξιον δ’ αὐτοῦ καὶ ἃ πρὸς Ἀντιφῶντα τὸν σοφιστὴν διελέχθη μὴ παραλιπεῖν.
It is due to him that a conversation he had with Antiphon the Sophist should not go unrecorded.

357 ὁ γὰρ Ἀντιφῶν ποτε βουλόμενος τοὺς συνουσιαστὰς αὐτοῦ παρελέσθαι προσελθὼν τῷ Σωκράτει παρόντων αὐτῶν ἔλεξε τάδε ·
Antiphon came to Socrates with the intention of drawing his companions away from him, and spoke thus in their presence:

358 ὦ Σώκρατες, ἐγὼ μὲν ᾤμην τοὺς φιλοσοφοῦντας εὐδαιμονεστέρους χρῆναι γίγνεσθαι ·
“Socrates, I supposed that philosophy must add to one’s store of happiness.

359 σὺ δέ μοι δοκεῖς τ- ἐναντία τῆς φιλοσοφίας ἀπολελαυκέναι.
But the fruits you have reaped from philosophy are apparently very different.

360 ζῇς γοῦν οὕτως ὡς οὐδ’ ἂν εἷς δοῦλος ὑπὸ δεσπότῃ διαιτώμενος μείνειε ·
For example, you are living a life that would drive even a slave to desert his master.

361 σῖτά τε σιτῇ καὶ ποτὰ πίνεις τὰ φαυλότατα, καὶ ἱμάτιον ἠμφίεσαι οὐ μόνον φαῦλον, ἀλλὰ τὸ αὐτὸ θέρους τε καὶ χειμῶνος, ἀνυπόδητός τε καὶ ἀχίτων διατελεῖς.
Your meat and drink are of the poorest: the cloak you wear is not only a poor thing, but is never changed summer or winter; and you never wear shoes or tunic.

362 καὶ μὴν χρήματά γε οὐ λαμβάνεις, ἃ καὶ κτωμένους εὐφραίνει καὶ κεκτημένους ἐλευθεριώτερόν τε καὶ ἥδιον ποιεῖ ζῆν.
Besides you refuse to take money, the mere getting of which is a joy, while its possession makes one more independent and happier.

363 εἰ οὖν ὥσπερ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἔργων οἱ διδάσκαλοι τοὺς μαθητὰς μιμητὰς ἑαυτῶν ἀποδεικνύουσιν, οὕτω καὶ σὺ τοὺς συνόντας διαθήσεις, νόμιζε κακοδαιμονίας διδάσκαλος εἶναι.
Now the professors of other subjects try to make their pupils copy their teachers: if you too intend to make your companions do that, you must consider yourself a professor of unhappiness.”

364 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης πρὸς ταῦτα εἶπε ·

To this Socrates replied:

365 δοκεῖς μοι, ὦ Ἀντιφῶν, ὑπειληφέναι με οὕτως ἀνιαρῶς ζῆν, ὥστε πέπεισμαι σὲ μᾶλλον ἀποθανεῖν ἂν ἑλέσθαι ἢ ζῆν ὥσπερ ἐγώ.

"Antiphon, you seem to have a notion that my life is so miserable, that I feel sure you would choose death in preference to a life like mine."

366 ἴθι οὖν ἐπισκεψώμεθα τί χαλεπὸν ᾔσθησαι τοῦ ἐμοῦ βίου.

"Come then, let us consider together what hardship you have noticed in my life."

367 πότερον ὅτι τοῖς μὲν λαμβάνουσιν ἀργύριον ἀναγκαῖόν ἐστιν ἀπεργάζεσθαι τοῦτο ἐφ’ ᾧ ἂν μισθὸν λάβωσιν, ἐμοὶ δὲ μὴ λαμβάνοντι οὐκ ἀνάγκη διαλέγεσθαι ᾧ ἂν μὴ βούλωμαι;

"Is it that those who take money are bound to carry out the work for which they get a fee, while I, because I refuse to take it, am not obliged to talk with anyone against my will?"

368 ἢ τὴν δίαιτάν μου φαυλίζεις ὡς ἧττον μὲν ὑγιεινὰ ἐσθίοντος ἐμοῦ ἢ σοῦ, ἧττον δὲ ἰσχὺν παρέχοντα;

"Or do you think my food poor because it is less wholesome than yours or less nourishing?"

369 ἢ ὡς χαλεπώτερα πορίσασθαι τὰ ἐμὰ διαιτήματα τῶν σῶν διὰ τὸ σπανιώτερά τε καὶ πολυτελέστερα εἶναι;

"Or because my viands are harder to get than yours, being scarcer and more expensive?"

370 ἢ ὡς ἡδίω σοι ἃ σὺ παρασκευάζῃ ὄντα ἢ ἐμοὶ ἃ ἐγώ;

"Or because your diet is more enjoyable than mine?"

371 οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι ὁ μὲν ἥδιστα ἐσθίων ἥκιστα ὄψου δεῖται, ὁ δὲ ἥδιστα πίνων ἥκιστα τοῦ μὴ παρόντος ἐπιθυμεῖ ποτοῦ;

"Do you not know that the greater the enjoyment of eating the less the need of sauce; the greater the enjoyment of drinking, the less the desire for drinks that are not available?"

372 τά γε μὴν ἱμάτια οἶσθ’ ὅτι οἱ μεταβαλλόμενοι ψύχους καὶ θάλπους ἕνεκα μεταβάλλονται, καὶ ὑποδήματα ὑποδοῦνται, ὅπως μὴ διὰ τὰ λυποῦντα τοὺς πόδας κωλύωνται πορεύεσθαι;

"As for cloaks, they are changed, as you know, on account of cold or heat. And shoes are worn as a protection to the feet against pain and inconvenience in walking."

373 ἤδη οὖν ποτε ᾔσθου ἐμὲ ἢ διὰ ψῦχος μᾶλλόν του ἔνδον μένοντα, ἢ διὰ θάλπος μαχόμενόν τῳ περὶ σκιᾶς, ἢ διὰ τὸ ἀλγεῖν τοὺς πόδας οὐ βαδίζοντα ὅπου ἂν βούλωμαι;

"Now did you ever know me to stay indoors more than others on account of the cold, or to fight with any man for the shade because of the heat, or to be prevented from walking anywhere by sore feet?"

374 οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι οἱ φύσει ἀσθενέστατοι τῷ σώματι μελετήσαντες τῶν ἰσχυροτάτων ἀμελησάντων κρείττους τε γίγνονται πρὸς ἃ ἂν μελετῶσι καὶ ῥᾷον αὐτὰ φέρουσιν;

"Do you not know that by training, a puny weakling comes to be better at any form of exercise he practises, and gets more staying power, than the muscular prodigy who neglects to train?"

375 ἐμὲ δὲ ἄρα οὐκ οἴει, τῷ σώματι ἀεὶ τὰ συντυγχάνοντα μελετῶντα καρτερεῖν, πάντα ῥᾷον φέρειν σοῦ μὴ μελετῶντος;

"Seeing then that I am always training my body to answer any and every call on its powers, do you not think that I can stand every strain better than you can without training?"

376 τοῦ δὲ μὴ δουλεύειν γαστρὶ μηδ’ ὕπνῳ καὶ λαγνείᾳ οἴει τι ἄλλο αἰτιώτερον εἶναι ἢ τὸ ἕτερα ἔχειν τούτων ἡδίω, ἃ οὐ μόνον ἐν χρείᾳ ὄντα εὐφραίνει, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐλπίδας παρέχοντα ὠφελήσειν ἀεί;

"For avoiding slavery to the belly or to sleep and incontinence, is there, think you, any more effective specific than the possession of other and greater pleasures, which are delightful not only to enjoy, but also because they arouse hopes of lasting benefit?"

377 καὶ μὴν τοῦτό γε οἶσθα, ὅτι οἱ μὲν οἰόμενοι μηδὲν εὖ πράττειν οὐκ εὐφραίνονται, οἱ δὲ ἡγούμενοι καλῶς προχωρεῖν ἑαυτοῖς ἢ γεωργίαν ἢ ναυκληρίαν ἢ ἄλλ’ ὅ τι ἂν τυγχάνωσιν ἐργαζόμενοι ὡς εὖ πράττοντες εὐφραίνονται.

"And again, you surely know that while he who supposes that nothing goes well with him is unhappy, he who believes that he is successful in farming or a shipping concern or any other business he is engaged in is happy in the thought of his prosperity."

378 οἴει οὖν ἀπὸ πάντων τούτων τοσαύτην ἡδονὴν εἶναι ὅσην ἀπὸ τοῦ ἑαυτόν τε ἡγεῖσθαι βελτίω γίγνεσθαι καὶ φίλους ἀμείνους κτᾶσθαι;

"Do you think then that out of all this thinking there comes anything so pleasant as the thought: 'I am growing in goodness and I am making better friends?'"

379 ἐγὼ τοίνυν διατελῶ ταῦτα νομίζων.

"And that, I may say, is my constant thought."

380 ἐὰν δὲ δὴ φίλους ἢ πόλιν ὠφελεῖν δέῃ, ποτέρῳ ἡ πλείων σχολὴ τούτων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, τῷ ὡς ἐγὼ νῦν ἢ τῷ ὡς σὺ μακαρίζεις διαιτωμένῳ;

"Further, if help is wanted by friends or city, which of the two has more leisure to supply their needs, he who lives as I am living or he whose life you call happy?"

381 στρατεύοιτο δὲ πότερος ἂν ῥᾷον, ὁ μὴ δυνάμενος ἄνευ πολυτελοῦς διαίτης ζῆν ἢ ᾧ τὸ παρὸν ἀρκοίη;

"Which will find soldiering the easier task, he who cannot exist without expensive food or he who is content with what he can get?"

382 ἐκπολιορκηθείη δὲ πότερος ἂν θᾶττον, ὁ τῶν χαλεπωτάτων εὑρεῖν δεόμενος ἢ ὁ τοῖς ῥᾴστοις ἐντυγχάνειν ἀρκούντως χρώμενος;

"Which when besieged will surrender first, he who wants what is very hard to come by or he who can make shift with whatever is at hand?"

383 ἔοικας, ὦ Ἀντιφῶν, τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν οἰομένῳ τρυφὴν καὶ πολυτέλειαν εἶναι· ἐγὼ δὲ νομίζω τὸ μὲν μηδενὸς δεῖσθαι θεῖον εἶναι, τὸ δ' ὡς ἐλαχίστων ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ θείου, καὶ τὸ μὲν θεῖον κράτιστον, τὸ δ' ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ θείου ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ κρατίστου.


384 Εγὼ δὲ νομίζω τὸ μὲν μηδενὸς δεῖσθαι θεῖον εἶναι, τὸ δ' ὡς ἐλαχίστων ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ θείου, καὶ τὸ μὲν θεῖον κράτιστον, τὸ δ' ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ θείου ἐγγυτάτω τοῦ κρατίστου.

"You seem, Antiphon, to imagine that happiness consists in luxury and extravagance. But my belief is that to have no wants is divine; to have as few as possible comes next to the divine; and as that which is divine is supreme, so that which approaches nearest to its nature is nearest to the supreme."

385 πάλιν δέ ποτε ὁ Ἀντιφῶν διαλεγόμενος τῷ Σωκράτει εἶπεν·

"In another conversation with Socrates, Antiphon said:"

386 ὦ Σώκρατες, ἐγώ τοί σε δίκαιον μὲν νομίζω, σοφὸν δὲ οὐδ' ὁπωστιοῦν·

"Socrates, I for my part believe you to be a just, but by no means a wise man."

387 δοκεῖς δέ μοι καὶ αὐτὸς τοῦτο γιγνώσκειν·

"And I think you realise it yourself."

388 οὐδένα γοῦν τῆς συνουσίας ἀργύριον πράττῃ.

"Anyhow, you decline to take money for your society."

389 καίτοι τό γε ἱμάτιον ἢ τὴν οἰκίαν ἢ ἄλλο τι ὧν κέκτησαι νομίζων ἀργυρίου ἄξιον εἶναι οὐδενὶ ἂν μὴ ὅτι προῖκα δοίης, ἀλλ’ οὐδ’ ἔλαττον τῆς ἀξίας λαβών.

"Yet if you believed your cloak or house or anything you possess to be worth money, you would not part with it for nothing or even for less than its value."

390 δῆλον δὴ ὅτι εἰ καὶ τὴν συνουσίαν ᾤου τινὸς ἀξίαν εἶναι, καὶ ταύτης ἂν οὐκ ἔλαττον τῆς ἀξίας ἀργύριον ἐπράττου.

"Clearly, then, if you set any value on your society, you would insist on getting the proper price for that too."

391 δίκαιος μὲν οὖν ἂν εἴης, ὅτι οὐκ ἐξαπατᾷς ἐπὶ πλεονεξίᾳ, σοφὸς δὲ οὐκ ἄν, μηδενός γε ἄξια ἐπιστάμενος.

"It may well be that you are a just man because you do not cheat people through avarice; but wise you cannot be, since your knowledge is not worth anything."

392 ὁ δὲ Σωκράτης πρὸς ταῦτα εἶπεν·
To this Socrates replied:

393 ὦ Ἀντιφῶν, παρ’ ἡμῖν νομίζεται τὴν ὥραν καὶ τὴν σοφίαν ὁμοίως μὲν καλόν, ὁμοίως δὲ αἰσχρὸν διατίθεσθαι εἶναι.
"Antiphon, it is common opinion among us in regard to beauty and wisdom that there is an honourable and a shameful way of bestowing them."

394 τήν τε γὰρ ὥραν ἐὰν μέν τις ἀργυρίου πωλῇ τῷ βουλομένῳ, πόρνον αὐτὸν ἀποκαλοῦσιν, ἐὰν δέ τις, ὃν ἂν γνῷ καλόν τε κ- ἀγαθὸν ἐραστὴν ὄντα, τοῦτον φίλον ἑαυτῷ ποιῆται, σώφρονα νομίζομεν·
"For to offer one’s beauty for money to all comers is called prostitution; but we think it virtuous to become friendly with a lover who is known to be a man of honour."

395 καὶ τὴν σοφίαν ὡσαύτως τοὺς μὲν ἀργυρίου τῷ βουλομένῳ πωλοῦντας σοφιστὰς ὥσπερ πόρνους ἀποκαλοῦσιν, ὅστις δὲ ὃν ἂν γνῷ εὐφυᾶ ὄντα διδάσκων ὅ τι ἂν ἔχῃ ἀγαθὸν φίλον ποιεῖται, τοῦτον νομίζομεν, ἃ τῷ καλῷ κ- ἀγαθῷ πολίτῃ προσήκει, ταῦτα ποιεῖν.
"So is it with wisdom. Those who offer it to all comers for money are known as sophists, prostitutors of wisdom, but we think that he who makes a friend of one whom he knows to be gifted by nature, and teaches him all the good he can, fulfils the duty of a citizen and a gentleman."

396 ἐγὼ δ’ οὖν καὶ αὐτός, ὦ Ἀντιφῶν, ὥσπερ ἄλλος τις ἢ ἵππῳ ἀγαθῷ ἢ κυνὶ ἢ ὄρνιθι ἥδεται, οὕτω καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον ἥδομαι φίλοις ἀγαθοῖς, καὶ ἐάν τι ἔχω ἀγαθόν, διδάσκω, καὶ ἄλλοις συνίστημι παρ’ ὧν ἂν ἡγῶμ

αι ὠφελήσεσθαί τι αὐτοὺς εἰς ἀρετήν·
"That is my own view, Antiphon. Others have a fancy for a good horse or dog or bird: my fancy, stronger even than theirs, is for good friends. And I teach them all the good I can, and recommend them to others from whom I think they will get some moral benefit."

397 καὶ τοὺς θησαυροὺς τῶν πάλαι σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν, οὓς ἐκεῖνοι κατέλιπον ἐν βιβλίοις γράψαντες, ἀνελίττων κοινῇ σὺν τοῖς φίλοις διέρχομαι, καὶ ἄν τι ὁρῶμεν ἀγαθὸν ἐκλεγόμεθα·
"And the treasures that the wise men of old have left us in their writings I open and explore with my friends. If we come on any good thing, we extract it, and we set much store on being useful to one another."

398 καὶ μέγα νομίζομεν κέρδος, ἐὰν ἀλλήλοις φίλοι γιγνώμεθα.
"For my part, when I heard these words fall from his lips, I judged him to be a happy man himself and to be putting his hearers in the way of being gentlemen."

399 ἐμοὶ μὲν δὴ ταῦτα ἀκούοντι ἐδόκει αὐτός τε μακάριος εἶναι καὶ τοὺς ἀκούοντας ἐπὶ καλοκἀγαθίαν ἄγειν.
"And we set much store on being useful to one another."

400 καὶ πάλιν ποτὲ τοῦ Ἀντιφῶντος ἐρομένου αὐτόν, πῶς ἄλλους μὲν ἡγεῖται πολιτικοὺς ποιεῖν, αὐτὸς δ’ οὐ πράττει τὰ πολιτικά, εἴπερ ἐπίσταται·
On yet another occasion Antiphon asked him: "How can you suppose that you make politicians of others, when you yourself avoid politics even if you understand them?"

401 ποτέρως δ’ ἄν, ἔφη, ὦ Ἀντιφῶν, μᾶλλον τὰ πολιτικὰ πράττοιμι, εἰ μόνος αὐτὰ πράττοιμι ἢ εἰ ἐπιμελοίμην τοῦ ὡς πλείστους ἱκανοὺς εἶναι πράττειν αὐτά;
"How now, Antiphon?" he retorted, "should I play a more important part in politics by engaging in them alone or by taking pains to turn out as many competent politicians as possible?"

402 ἐπισκεψώμεθα δὲ εἰ καὶ ἀλαζονείας ἀποτρέπων τοὺς συνόντας ἀρετῆς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι προέτρεπεν·
Let us next consider whether by discouraging imposture he encouraged his companions to cultivate virtue.

403 ἀεὶ γὰρ ἔλεγεν ὡς οὐκ εἴη καλλίων ὁδὸς ἐπ’ εὐδοξίαν ἢ δι’ ἧς ἄν τις ἀγαθὸς τοῦτο γένοιτο, ὃ καὶ δοκεῖν βούλοιτο.
For he always said that the best road to glory is the way that makes a man as good as he wishes to be thought.

404 ὅτι δ’ ἀληθῆ ἔλεγεν, ὧδ’ ἐδίδασκεν·
And this was how he demonstrated the truth of this saying:

405 ἐνθυμώμεθα γάρ, ἔφη, εἴ τις μὴ ὢν ἀγαθὸς αὐλητὴς δοκεῖν βούλοιτο, τί ἂν αὐτῷ ποιητέον εἴη.
"Suppose a bad flute-player wants to be thought a good one, let us note what he must do."

406 ἆρ’ οὐ τὰ ἔξω τῆς τέχνης μιμητέον τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς αὐλητάς;
"Must he not imitate good players in the accessories of the art?"

407 καὶ πρῶτον μέν, ὅτι ἐκεῖνοι σκεύη τε καλὰ κέκτηνται καὶ ἀκολούθους πολλοὺς περιάγονται, καὶ τούτῳ ταῦτα ποιητέον·
"First, as they wear fine clothes and travel with many attendants, he must do the same."

408 ἔπειτα, ὅτι ἐκείνους πολλοὶ ἐπαινοῦσι, καὶ τούτῳ πολλοὺς ἐπαινέτας παρασκευαστέον.
"Further, seeing that they win the applause of crowds, he must provide himself with a large claque."

409 ἀλλὰ μὴν ἔργον γε οὐδαμοῦ ληπτέον, ἢ εὐθὺς ἐλεγχθήσεται γελοῖος ὢν καὶ οὐ μόνον αὐλητὴς κακός, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄνθρωπος ἀλαζών.
"But, of course, he must never accept an engagement, or he will promptly expose himself to ridicule as an incompetent player and an impostor to boot."

410 καίτοι πολλὰ μὲν δαπανῶν, μηδὲν δ’ ὠφελούμενος, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις κακοδοξῶν, πῶς οὐκ ἐπιπόνως τε καὶ ἀλυσιτελῶς καὶ καταγελάστως βιώσεται;
"And so, what with incurring heavy expense and gaining nothing, and bringing disgrace on himself as well, he will make his life burdensome, unprofitable and ridiculous."

411 ὣς δ’ αὔτως εἴ τις βούλοιτο στρατηγὸς ἀγαθὸς μὴ ὢν φαίνεσθαι ἢ κυβερνήτης, ἐννοῶμεν τί ἂν αὐτῷ συμβαίνοι.
"So too if a man who is not a general or a pilot wanted to be thought a good one, let us imagine what would happen to him."

412 ἆρ’ οὐκ ἄν, εἰ μὲν ἐπιθυμῶν τοῦ δοκεῖν ἱκανὸς εἶναι ταῦτα πράττειν μὴ δύναιτο πείθειν, τοῦτ’ εἴη λυπηρόν, εἰ δὲ πείσειεν, ἔτι ἀθλιώτερον;
"If his efforts to seem proficient in these duties failed to carry conviction, would not his failure be galling to him? if they succeeded, would not his success be still more disastrous?"

413 δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι κυβερνᾶν κατασταθεὶς ὁ μὴ ἐπιστάμενος ἢ στρατηγεῖν ἀπολέσειεν ἂν οὓς ἥκιστα βούλοιτο καὶ αὐτὸς αἰσχρῶς ἂν καὶ κακῶς ἀπαλλάξειεν.
"for it is certain that if a man who knew nothing about piloting a ship or commanding an army were appointed to such work, he would lose those whom he least wanted to lose and would bring ruin and disgrace on himself."

414 ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ τὸ πλούσιον καὶ τὸ ἀνδρεῖον καὶ τὸ ἰσχυρὸν μὴ ὄντα δοκεῖν ἀλυσιτελὲς ἀπέφαινε;
"By similar reasoning he would show how unprofitable is a reputation for wealth or courage or strength when it is undeserved."

415 προστάττεσθαι γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἔφη μείζω ἢ κατὰ δύναμιν, καὶ μὴ δυναμένους ταῦτα ποιεῖν, δοκοῦντας ἱκανοὺς εἶναι, συγγνώμης οὐκ ἂν τυγχάνειν.
"Tasks beyond their powers," he would say, "are laid on the incompetent, and no mercy is shown to them when they disappoint the expectation formed of their capability."

416 ἀπατεῶνα δ’ ἐκάλει οὐ μικρὸν μὲν οὐδ’ εἴ τις ἀργύριον ἢ σκεῦος παρά του πειθοῖ λαβὼν ἀποστεροίη, πολὺ δὲ μέγιστον ὅστις μηδενὸς ἄξιος ὢν ἐξηπατήκοι πείθων ὡς ἱκανὸς εἴη τῆς πόλεως ἡγεῖσθαι.
"The man who persuades you to lend him money or goods and then keeps them is without doubt a rogue; but much the greatest rogue of all is the man who has gulled his city into the belief that he is fit to direct it."

417 ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν ἐδόκει καὶ τοῦ ἀλαζονεύεσθαι ἀποτρέπειν τοὺς συνόντας τοιάδε διαλεγόμενος.
"For my part I thought that such talks did discourage imposture among his companions."

418 ἐδόκει δέ μοι καὶ τοιαῦτα λέγων προτρέπειν τοὺς συνόντας ἀσκεῖν ἐγκράτειαν πρὸς ἐπιθυμίαν βρωτοῦ καὶ ποτοῦ καὶ λαγνείας καὶ ὕπνου καὶ ῥίγους καὶ θάλπους καὶ πόνου.
"In other conversations I thought that he exhorted his companions to practise self-control in the matter of eating and drinking, and sexual indulgence, and sleeping, and endurance of cold and heat and toil."

419 γνοὺς γάρ τινα τῶν συνόντων ἀκολαστοτέρως ἔχοντα πρὸς τὰ τοιαῦτα, εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Ἀρίστιππε, εἰ δέοι σε παιδεύειν παραλαβόντα δύο τῶν νέων, τὸν μέν, ὅπως ἱκανὸς ἔσται ἄρχειν, τὸν δ’, ὅπως μηδ’ ἀντιποιήσεται ἀρχῆς, πῶς ἂν ἑκάτερον παιδεύοις;
"Aware that one of his companions was rather intemperate in such matters, he said: 'Tell me, Aristippus, if you were required to take charge of two youths and educate them so that the one would be fit to rule and the other would never think of putting himself forward, how would you educate them? Shall we consider it, beginning with the elementary question of food?'"

420 βούλει σκοπῶμεν ἀρξάμενοι ἀπὸ τῆς τροφῆς ὥσπερ ἀπὸ τῶν στοιχείων;
"Oh yes," replied Aristippus, "food does seem to come first; for one can’t live without food."

421 καὶ ὁ Ἀρίστιππος ἔφη·
Aristippus agreed, saying, "Yes, naturally."

422 δοκεῖ γοῦν μοι ἡ τροφὴ ἀρχὴ εἶναι·
He continued, "Food does seem to come first."

423 οὐδὲ γὰρ ζῴη γ’ ἄν τις, εἰ μὴ τρέφοιτο.
"For one can't live without food."

424 οὐκοῦν τὸ μὲν βούλεσθαι σίτου ἅπτεσθαι, ὅταν ὥρα ἥκῃ, ἀμφοτέροις εἰκὸς παραγίγνεσθαι;
"Well, now, will not a desire for food naturally arise in both at certain times?" 

425 εἰκὸς γάρ, ἔφη.
"Yes, naturally," Aristippus responded.

426 τὸ οὖν προαιρεῖσθαι τὸ κατεπεῖγον μᾶλλον πράττειν ἢ τῇ γαστρὶ

 χαρίζεσθαι πότερον ἂν αὐτῶν ἐθίζοιμεν;
"Now which of the two should we train in the habit of transacting urgent business before he satisfies his hunger?"

427 τὸν εἰς τὸ ἄρχειν, ἔφη, νὴ Δία παιδευόμενον, ὅπως μὴ τὰ τῆς πόλεως ἄπρακτα γίγνηται παρὰ τὴν ἐκείνου ἀρχήν.
"The one who is being trained to rule, undoubtedly; else State business might be neglected during his tenure."

428 οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, καὶ ὅταν πιεῖν βούλωνται, τὸ δύνασθαι διψῶντα ἀνέχεσθαι τῷ αὐτῷ προσθετέον;
"And must not the same one be given power to resist thirst when both want to drink?"

429 πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.
"Certainly," said Aristippus.

430 τὸ δὲ ὕπνου ἐγκρατῆ εἶναι, ὥστε δύνασθαι καὶ ὀψὲ κοιμηθῆναι καὶ πρῲ ἀναστῆναι καὶ ἀγρυπνῆσαι, εἴ τι δέοι, ποτέρῳ ἂν προσθείημεν;
"And to which shall we give the power of limiting his sleep so that he can go late to bed and get up early, and do without sleep if need be?"

431 καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη, τῷ αὐτῷ.
"To the same again," Aristippus agreed.

432 τί δέ, ἔφη, τὸ ἀφροδισίων ἐγκρατῆ εἶναι, ὥστε μὴ διὰ ταῦτα κωλύεσθαι πράττειν, εἴ τι δέοι;
"And the power to control his passions, so that he may not be hindered in doing necessary work?"

433 καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη, τῷ αὐτῷ.
"To the same again," he said.

434 τί δέ, τὸ μὴ φεύγειν τοὺς πόνους, ἀλλ’ ἐθελοντὴν ὑπομένειν ποτέρῳ ἂν προσθείημεν;
"And to which shall we give the habit of not shirking a task, but undertaking it willingly?"

435 καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη, τῷ ἄρχειν παιδευομένῳ.
"That too will go to the one who is being trained to rule," said Aristippus.


436	τί δέ , τὸ μαθεῖν εἴ τι ἐπιτήδειόν ἐστι μάθημα πρὸς τὸ κρατεῖν τῶν ἀντιπάλων , ποτέρῳ ἂν προσθεῖναι μᾶλλον πρέποι ;
"And to which would the knowledge needful for overcoming enemies be more appropriately given?"

437	πολὺ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , τῷ ἄρχειν παιδευομένῳ ·
"Without doubt to the one who is being trained to rule;

438	καὶ γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων οὐδὲν ὄφελος ἄνευ τῶν τοιούτων μαθημάτων .
 for the other lessons would be useless without such knowledge."

439	οὐκοῦν ὁ οὕτω πεπαιδευμένος ἧττον ἂν δοκεῖ σοι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀντιπάλων ἢ τὰ λοιπὰ ζῷα ἁλίσκεσθαι ;
"Don’t you think that with this education he will be less likely to be caught by his enemy than other creatures?"

440	τούτων γὰρ δήπου τὰ μὲν γαστρὶ δελεαζόμενα , καὶ μάλα ἔνια δυσωπούμενα , ὅμως τῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ τοῦ φαγεῖν ἀγόμενα πρὸς τὸ δέλεαρ ἁλίσκεται , τὰ δὲ ποτῷ ἐνεδρεύεται .
"Some of them, you know, are so greedy, that in spite of extreme timidity in some cases, they are drawn irresistibly to the bait to get food, and are caught; and others are snared by drink."

441	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Yes, certainly."

442	οὐκοῦν καὶ ἄλλα ὑπὸ λαγνείας , οἷον οἵ τε ὄρτυγες καὶ οἱ πέρδικες , πρὸς τὴν τῆς θηλείας φωνὴν τῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ καὶ τῇ ἐλπίδι τῶν ἀφροδισίων φερόμενοι καὶ ἐξιστάμενοι τοῦ τὰ δεινὰ ἀναλογίζεσθαι τοῖς θηράτροις ἐμπίπτουσι ;
"Others again — quails and partridges, for instance — are so amorous, that when they hear the cry of the female, they are carried away by desire and anticipation, throw caution to the winds and blunder into the nets. Is it not so?"

443	συνέφη καὶ ταῦτα .
He agreed again.

444	οὐκοῦν δοκεῖ σοι

 αἰσχρὸν εἶναι ἀνθρώπῳ τ- αὐτὰ πάσχειν τοῖς ἀφρονεστάτοις τῶν θηρίων ;
"Now, don’t you think it disgraceful that a man should be in the same plight as the silliest of wild creatures?"

445	ὥσπερ οἱ μοιχοὶ εἰσέρχονται εἰς τὰς εἰρκτάς , εἰδότες ὅτι κίνδυνος τῷ μοιχεύοντι ἅ τε ὁ νόμος ἀπειλεῖ παθεῖν καὶ ἐνεδρευθῆναι καὶ ληφθέντα ὑβρισθῆναι ·
"Thus an adulterer enters the women’s quarters, knowing that by committing adultery he is in danger of incurring the penalties threatened by the law, and that he may be trapped, caught and ill-treated."

446	καὶ τηλικούτων μὲν ἐπικειμένων τῷ μοιχεύοντι κακῶν τε καὶ αἰσχρῶν , ὄντων δὲ πολλῶν τῶν ἀπολυσόντων τῆς τῶν ἀφροδισίων ἐπιθυμίας ἐν ἀδείᾳ , ὅμως εἰς τὰ ἐπικίνδυνα φέρεσθαι , ἆρ’ οὐκ ἤδη τοῦτο παντάπασι κακοδαιμονῶντός ἐστιν ;
"When such misery and disgrace hang over the adulterer’s head, and there are many remedies to relieve him of his carnal desire without risk, is it not sheer lunacy to plunge headlong into danger?"

447	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"Yes, I think it is."

448	τὸ δὲ εἶναι μὲν τὰς ἀναγκαιοτάτας πλείστας πράξεις τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐν ὑπαίθρῳ , οἷον τάς τε πολεμικὰς καὶ τὰς γεωργικὰς καὶ τῶν ἄλλων οὐ τὰς ἐλαχίστας , τοὺς δὲ πολλοὺς ἀγυμνάστως ἔχειν πρός τε ψύχη καὶ θάλπη οὐ δοκεῖ σοι πολλὴ ἀμέλεια εἶναι ;
"And considering that the great majority of essential occupations, warfare, agriculture and very many others, are carried on in the open air, don’t you think it gross negligence that so many men are untrained to withstand cold and heat?"

449	συνέφη καὶ τοῦτο .
He agreed again.

450	οὐκοῦν δοκεῖ σοι τὸν μέλλοντα ἄρχειν ἀσκεῖν δεῖν καὶ ταῦτα εὐπετῶς φέρειν ;
"Don’t you think then, that one who is going to rule must adapt himself to bear them lightly?"

451	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly."

452	οὐκοῦν εἰ τοὺς ἐγκρατεῖς τούτων ἁπάντων εἰς τοὺς ἀρχικοὺς τάττομεν , τοὺς ἀδυνάτους ταῦτα ποιεῖν εἰς τοὺς μηδ’ ἀντιποιησομένους τοῦ ἄρχειν τάξομεν ;
"If then we classify those who control themselves in all these matters as fit to rule, shall we not classify those who cannot behave so as men with no claim to be rulers?"

453	συνέφη καὶ τοῦτο .
He agreed again.

454	τί οὖν ;
"Well now, 

455	ἐπειδὴ καὶ τούτων ἑκατέρου τοῦ φύλου τὴν τάξιν οἶσθα , ἤδη ποτ’ ἐπεσκέψω , εἰς ποτέραν τῶν τάξεων τούτων σαυτὸν δικαίως ἂν τάττοις ;
as you know the category to which each of these species belongs, have you ever considered in which category you ought to put yourself?"

456	ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη ὁ Ἀρίστιππος ·
"I have; 

457	καὶ οὐδαμῶς γε τάττω ἐμαυτὸν εἰς τὴν τῶν ἄρχειν βουλομένων τάξιν .
and I do not for a moment put myself in the category of those who want to be rulers."

"For considering how hard a matter it is to provide for one’s own needs, I think it absurd not to be content to do that, but to shoulder the burden of supplying the wants of the community as well."

458	καὶ γὰρ πάνυ μοι δοκεῖ ἄφρονος ἀνθρώπου εἶναι τό , μεγάλου ἔργου ὄντος τοῦ ἑαυτῷ τὰ δέοντα παρασκευάζειν , μὴ ἀρκεῖν τοῦτο , ἀλλὰ προσαναθέσθαι τὸ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις πολίταις ὧν δέονται πορίζειν ·


459	καὶ ἑαυτῷ μὲν πολλὰ ὧν βούλεται ἐλλείπειν , τῆς δὲ πόλεως προεστῶτα , ἐὰν μὴ πάντα ὅσα ἡ πόλις βούλεται καταπράττῃ , τούτου δίκην ὑπέχειν , τοῦτο πῶς οὐ πολλὴ ἀφροσύνη ἐστί ;
"That anyone should sacrifice a large part of his own wishes and make himself accountable as head of the state for the least failure to carry out all the wishes of the community is surely the height of folly."

460	καὶ γὰρ ἀξιοῦσιν αἱ πόλεις τοῖς ἄρχουσιν ὥσπερ ἐγὼ τοῖς οἰκέταις χρῆσθαι .
"For states claim to treat their rulers just as I claim to treat my servants."

461	ἐγώ τε γὰρ ἀξιῶ τοὺς θεράποντας ἐμοὶ μὲν ἄφθονα τὰ ἐπιτήδεια παρασκευάζειν , αὐτοὺς δὲ μηδενὸς τούτων ἅπτεσθαι , αἵ τε πόλεις οἴονται χρῆναι τοὺς ἄρχοντας ἑαυταῖς μὲν ὡς πλεῖστα ἀγαθὰ πορίζειν , αὐτοὺς δὲ πάντων τούτων ἀπέχεσθαι .
"I expect my men to provide me with necessaries in abundance, but not to touch any of them; and states hold it to be the business of the ruler to supply them with all manner of good things, and to abstain from all of them himself."

462	ἐγὼ οὖν τοὺς μὲν βουλομένους πολλὰ πράγματα ἔχειν αὐτούς τε καὶ ἄλλοις παρέχειν οὕτως ἂν παιδεύσας εἰς τοὺς ἀρχικοὺς καταστήσαιμι ·
"And so, should anyone want to bring plenty of trouble on himself and others, I would educate him as you propose and number him with those fitted to be rulers."

463	ἐμαυτόν γε μέντοι τάττω εἰς τοὺς βουλομένους ᾗ ῥᾷστά τε καὶ ἥδιστα βιοτεύειν .
"but myself I classify with those who wish for a life of the greatest ease and pleasure that can be had."

464	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·
Here Socrates asked:

465	βούλει οὖν καὶ τοῦτο σκεψώμεθα , πότερον ἥδιον ζῶσιν οἱ ἄρχοντες ἢ οἱ ἀρχόμενοι ;
"Shall we then consider whether the rulers or the ruled live the pleasanter life?"

466	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," replied Aristippus.

467	πρῶτον μὲν τοίνυν τῶν ἐθνῶν ὧν ἡμεῖς ἴσμεν ἐν μὲν τῇ Ἀσίᾳ Πέρσαι μὲν ἄρχουσιν , ἄρχονται δὲ Σύροι καὶ Φρύγες καὶ Λ

υδοί ·
"To take first the nations known to us. In Asia the rulers are the Persians; the Syrians, Lydians and Phrygians are the ruled."

468	ἐν δὲ τῇ Εὐρώπῃ Σκύθαι μὲν ἄρχουσι , Μαιῶται δὲ ἄρχονται ·
"In Europe the Scythians rule, and the Maeotians are ruled."

469	ἐν δὲ τῇ Λιβύῃ Καρχηδόνιοι μὲν ἄρχουσι , Λίβυες δὲ ἄρχονται .
"In Africa the Carthaginians rule, and the Libyans are ruled."

470	τούτων οὖν ποτέρους ἥδιον οἴει ζῆν ;
"Which of the two classes, think you, enjoys the pleasanter life?"

471	ἢ τῶν Ἑλλήνων , ἐν οἷς καὶ αὐτὸς εἶ , πότερά σοι δοκοῦσιν ἥδιον οἱ κρατοῦντες ἢ οἱ κρατούμενοι , ζῆν ;
"Or take the Greeks, of whom you yourself are one; do you think that the controlling or the controlled communities enjoy the pleasanter life?"

472	ἀλλ’ ἐγώ τοι , ἔφη ὁ Ἀρίστιππος , οὐδὲ εἰς τὴν δουλείαν ἐμαυτὸν τάττω , ἀλλ’ εἶναί τίς μοι δοκεῖ μέση τούτων ὁδός , ἣν πειρῶμαι βαδίζειν , οὔτε δι’ ἀρχῆς οὔτε διὰ δουλείας , ἀλλὰ δι’ ἐλευθερίας , ἥπερ μάλιστα πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν ἄγει .
"Nay," replied Aristippus, "for my part I am no candidate for slavery; but there is, as I hold, a middle path in which I am fain to walk. That way leads neither through rule nor slavery, but through liberty, which is the royal road to happiness."

473	ἀλλ’ εἰ μέν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ὥσπερ οὔτε δι’ ἀρχῆς οὔτε διὰ δουλείας ἡ ὁδὸς αὕτη φέρει , οὕτω μηδὲ δι’ ἀνθρώπων , ἴσως ἄν τι λέγοις ·
"Ah," said Socrates, "if only that path can avoid the world as well as rule and slavery, there may be something in what you say. But, since you are in the world, if you intend neither to rule nor to be ruled, and do not choose to truckle to the rulers"

474	εἰ μέντοι ἐν ἀνθρώποις ὢν μήτε ἄρχειν ἀξιώσεις μήτε ἄρχεσθαι μηδὲ τοὺς ἄρχοντας ἑκὼν θεραπεύσεις , οἶμαί σε ὁρᾶν ὡς ἐπίστανται οἱ κρείττονες τοὺς ἥττονας καὶ κοινῇ καὶ ἰδίᾳ κλαίοντας καθίσαντες δούλοις χρῆσθαι ·
 — "I think you must see that the stronger have a way of making the weaker rue their lot both in public and in private life, and treating them like slaves."

475	ἢ λανθάνουσί σε οἱ ἄλλων σπειράντων καὶ φυτευσάντων τόν τε σῖτον τέμνοντες καὶ δενδροκοποῦντες καὶ πάντα τρόπον πολιορκοῦντες τοὺς ἥττονας καὶ μὴ θέλοντας θεραπεύειν , ἕως ἂν πείσωσιν ἑλέσθαι δουλεύειν ἀντὶ τοῦ πολεμε

ῖν τοῖς κρείττσι ;
"You cannot be unaware that where some have sown and planted, others cut their corn and fell their trees, and in all manner of ways harass the weaker if they refuse to bow down, until they are persuaded to accept slavery as an escape from war with the stronger."

476	καὶ ἰδίᾳ αὖ οἱ ἀνδρεῖον καὶ δυνατοὶ τοὺς ἀνάνδρους καὶ ἀδυνάτους οὐκ οἶσθα ὅτι καταδουλωσάμενοι καρποῦνται ;
"So, too, in private life do not brave and mighty men enslave and plunder the cowardly and feeble folk?"

477	ἀλλ’ ἐγώ τοι , ἔφη , ἵνα μὴ πάσχω ταῦτα , οὐδ’ εἰς πολιτείαν ἐμαυτὸν κατακλείω , ἀλλὰ ξένος πανταχοῦ εἰμι .
"Yes, but my plan for avoiding such treatment is this. I do not shut myself up in the four corners of a community, but am a stranger in every land," Aristippus replied.

478	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·
"A very cunning trick, that!" cried Socrates.

479	τοῦτο μέντοι ἤδη λέγεις δεινὸν πάλαισμα .
"For ever since the death of Sinis and Sceiron and Procrustes,"

480	τοὺς γὰρ ξένους , ἐξ οὗ ὅ τε Σίνις καὶ ὁ Σκείρων καὶ ὁ Προκρούστης ἀπέθανον , οὐδεὶς ἔτι ἀδικεῖ ·
"no one injures strangers! And yet nowadays those who take a hand in the affairs of their homeland pass laws to protect themselves from injury,"

481	ἀλλὰ νῦν οἱ μὲν πολιτευόμενοι ἐν ταῖς πατρίσι καὶ νόμους τίθενται , ἵνα μὴ ἀδικῶνται , καὶ φίλους πρὸς τοῖς ἀναγκαίοις καλουμένοις ἄλλους κτῶνται βοηθούς , καὶ ταῖς πόλεσιν ἐρύματα περιβάλλονται , καὶ ὅπλα κτῶνται οἷς ἀμυνοῦνται τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας , καὶ πρὸς τούτοις ἄλλους ἔξωθεν συμμάχους κατασκευάζονται ·
"get friends to help them over and above those whom nature has given them, encompass their cities with fortresses, get themselves weapons to ward off the workers of mischief; and besides all this seek to make allies in other lands; and in spite of all these precautions, they are still wronged."

482	καὶ οἱ μὲν ταῦτα πάντα κεκτημένοι ὅμως ἀδικοῦνται ·
"But you, with none of these advantages, spend much time on the open road, where so many come to harm; and into whatever city you enter, you rank below all its citizens,"

483	σὺ δὲ οὐδὲν μὲν τούτων ἔχων , ἐν δὲ ταῖς ὁδοῖς , ἔνθα πλεῖστοι ἀδικοῦνται , πολὺν χρόνον διατρίβων , εἰς ὁποίαν δ’ ἂν πόλιν ἀφίκῃ , τῶν πολιτῶν πάντων ἥττων ὤν , καὶ τοιοῦτος , οἵοις μάλιστα ἐπιτίθενται οἱ βουλόμενοι ἀδικεῖν , ὅμως διὰ τὸ ξένος εἶναι οὐκ ἂν ο

ἴει ἀδικηθῆναι ;
"and are one of those specially marked down for attack by intending wrongdoers; and yet, because you are a stranger, do you expect to escape injury? What gives you confidence?"

484	ἦ διότι αἱ πόλεις σοι κηρύττουσιν ἀσφάλειαν καὶ προσιόντι καὶ ἀπιόντι , θαρρεῖς ;
"Is it that the cities by proclamation guarantee your safety in your coming and going?"

485	ἢ διότι καὶ δοῦλος ἂν οἴει τοιοῦτος εἶναι οἷος μηδενὶ δεσπότῃ λυσιτελεῖν ;
"Or is it the thought that no master would find you worth having among his slaves?"

486	τίς γὰρ ἂν ἐθέλοι ἄνθρωπον ἐν οἰκίᾳ ἔχειν πονεῖν μὲν μηδὲν ἐθέλοντα , τῇ δὲ πολυτελεστάτῃ διαίτῃ χαίροντα ;
"For who would care to have a man in his house who wants to do no work and has a weakness for high living?"

487	σκεψώμεθα δὲ καὶ τοῦτο , πῶς οἱ δεσπόται τοῖς τοιούτοις οἰκέταις χρῶνται .
"But now let us see how masters treat such servants."

488	ἆρα οὐ τὴν μὲν λαγνείαν αὐτῶν τῷ λιμῷ σωφρονίζουσι ;
"Do they not starve them to keep them from immorality,"

489	κλέπτειν δὲ κωλύουσιν ἀποκλείοντες ὅθεν ἄν τι λαβεῖν ᾖ ;
"lock up the stores to stop their stealing,"

490	τοῦ δὲ δραπετεύειν δεσμοῖς ἀπείργουσι ;
"clap fetters on them so that they can’t run away,"

491	τὴν ἀργίαν δὲ πληγαῖς ἐξαναγκάζουσιν ;
"and beat the laziness out of them with whips?"

492	ἢ σὺ πῶς ποιεῖς , ὅταν τῶν οἰκετῶν τινα τοιοῦτον ὄντα καταμανθάνῃς ;
"What do you do yourself to cure such faults among your servants?"

493	κολάζω , ἔφη , πᾶσι κακοῖς , ἕως ἂν δουλεύειν ἀναγκάσω .
"I make their lives a burden to them until I reduce them to submission."

494	ἀλλὰ γάρ , ὦ Σώκρατες , οἱ εἰς τὴν βασιλικὴν τέχνην παιδευόμενοι , ἣν δοκεῖς μοι σὺ νομίζειν εὐδαιμονίαν εἶναι , τί διαφέρουσι τῶν ἐξ ἀνάγκης κακοπαθούντων , εἴ γε πεινήσουσι καὶ διψήσουσι καὶ ῥιγώσουσι καὶ ἀγρυπνήσουσι καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα μοχθήσουσιν ἑκόντες ;
"But how about those who are trained in the art of kingship, Socrates, which you appear to identify with happiness? How are they better off than those whose sufferings are compulsory, if they must bear hunger, thirst, cold, sleeplessness, and endure all these tortures willingly?"

495	ἐγὼ μὲν γὰρ οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅ τι διαφέρει τὸ αὐτὸ δέρμα ἑκόντα ἢ ἄκοντα μαστιγοῦσθαι ἢ ὅλως τὸ αὐτὸ σῶμα πᾶσι τοῖς τοιούτοις ἑκόντα ἢ ἄκοντα πολιορ

κεῖσθαι ἄλλο γε ἢ ἀφροσύνη πρόσεστι τῷ θέλοντι τὰ λυπηρὰ ὑπομένειν .
"For if the same back gets the flogging whether its owner kicks or consents, or, in short, if the same body, consenting or objecting, is besieged by all these torments, I see no difference, apart from the folly of voluntary suffering."

496	τί δέ , ὦ Ἀρίστιππε ;
"What, Aristippus?"

497	ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη , οὐ δοκεῖ σοι τῶν τοιούτων διαφέρειν τὰ ἑκούσια τῶν ἀκουσίων , ᾗ ὁ μὲν ἑκὼν πεινῶν φάγοι ἂν ὁπότε βούλοιτο καὶ ὁ ἑκὼν διψῶν πίοι καὶ τ- ἄλλα ὡσαύτως , τῷ δ’ ἐξ ἀνάγκης ταῦτα πάσχοντι οὐκ ἔξεστιν ὁπόταν βούληται παύεσθαι ;
"Socrates asked, 'Don’t you think that there is just this difference between these voluntary and involuntary sufferings, that if you bear hunger or thirst willingly, you can eat, drink, or what not, when you choose, whereas compulsory suffering is not to be ended at will?'"

498	ἔπειτα ὁ μὲν ἑκουσίως ταλαιπωρῶν ἐπ’ ἀγαθῇ ἐλπίδι πονῶν εὐφραίνεται , οἷον οἱ τὰ θηρία θηρῶντες ἐλπίδι τοῦ λήψεσθαι ἡδέως μοχθοῦσι .
"Besides, he who endures willingly enjoys his work because he is comforted by hope; hunters, for instance, toil gladly in hope of game."

499	καὶ τὰ μὲν τοιαῦτα ἆθλα τῶν πόνων μικροῦ τινος ἄξιά ἐστι , τοὺς δὲ πονοῦντας ἵνα φίλους ἀγαθοὺς κτήσωνται , ἢ ὅπως ἐχθροὺς χειρώσωνται , ἢ ἵνα δυνατοὶ γενόμενοι καὶ τοῖς σώμασι καὶ ταῖς ψυχαῖς καὶ τὸν ἑαυτῶν οἶκον καλῶς οἰκῶσι καὶ τοὺς φίλους εὖ ποιῶσι καὶ τὴν πατρίδα εὐεργετῶσι , πῶς οὐκ οἴεσθαι χρὴ τούτους καὶ πονεῖν ἡδέως εἰς τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ ζῆν εὐφραινομένους , ἀγαμένους μὲν ἑαυτούς , ἐπαινουμένους δὲ καὶ ζηλουμένους ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων ;

Rewards like these are indeed of little worth after all the toil; but what of those who toil to win good friends, or to subdue enemies, or to make themselves capable in body and soul of managing their own homes well, of helping their friends and serving their country? Surely these toil gladly for such prizes and live a joyous life, well content with themselves, praised and envied by everyone else?

Yes, I understand the prompt now. Let me intersperse the corresponding English translations for each Greek sentence, following the specific sentence numbers you provided, and ensuring the English fits the Greek without altering the sentence breaks:

500. ἔτι δὲ αἱ μὲν ῥᾳδιουργίαι καὶ ἐκ τοῦ παραχρῆμα ἡδοναὶ οὔτε σώματι εὐεξίαν ἱκαναί εἰσιν ἐνεργάζεσθαι, ὥς φασιν οἱ γυμνασταί, οὔτε ψυχῇ ἐπιστήμην ἀξιόλογον οὐδεμίαν ἐμποιοῦσιν, αἱ δὲ διὰ καρτερίας ἐπιμέλειαι τῶν καλῶν τε καὶ ἀγαθῶν ἔργων ἐξικνεῖσθαι ποιοῦσιν, ὥς φασιν οἱ ἀγαθοὶ ἄνδρες.

"Moreover, indolence and present enjoyment can never bring the body into good condition, as trainers say, neither do they put into the soul knowledge of any value, but strenuous effort leads up to good and noble deeds, as good men say."

501. λέγει δέ που καὶ Ἡσίοδος ·
"And so says Hesiod somewhere:"

502. τὴν μὲν γὰρ κακότητα καὶ ἰλαδὸν ἔστιν ἑλέσθαι ῥηιδίως ·
"'Wickedness can be had in abundance easily:"

503. λείη μὲν ὁδός, μάλα δ’ ἐγγύθι ναίει.
"smooth is the road and very nigh she dwells."

504. τῆς δ’ ἀρετῆς ἱδρῶτα θεοὶ προπάροιθεν ἔθηκαν ἀθάνατοι ·
"But in front of virtue the gods immortal have put sweat:"

505. μακρὸς δὲ καὶ ὄρθιος οἶμος ἐς αὐτὴν καὶ τρηχὺς τὸ πρῶτον ·
"long and steep is the path to her and rough at first;"

506. ἐπὴν δ’ εἰς ἄκρον ἵκηαι, ῥηιδίη δὴ ἔπειτα πέλει, χαλεπή περ ἐοῦσα.
"but when you reach the top, then at length the road is easy, hard though it was."

507. μαρτυρεῖ δὲ καὶ Ἐπίχαρμος ἐν τῷδε ·
"And we have the testimony of Epicharmus too in the line:"

508. τῶν πόνων πωλοῦσιν ἡμῖν πάντα τἀγάθ’ οἱ θεοί.
"'The gods demand of us toil

 as the price of all good things.'"

509. καὶ ἐν ἄλλῳ δὲ τόπῳ φησίν ·
"And elsewhere he says:"

510. ὦ πονηρέ, μὴ τὰ μαλακὰ μῶσο, μὴ τὰ σκλήρ’ ἔχῃς.
"'Knave, yearn not for the soft things, lest thou earn the hard.'"

511. καὶ Πρόδικος δὲ ὁ σοφὸς ἐν τῷ συγγράμματι τῷ περὶ Ἡρακλέους, ὅπερ δὴ καὶ πλείστοις ἐπιδείκνυται, ὡσαύτως περὶ τῆς ἀρετῆς ἀποφαίνεται, ὧδέ πως λέγων, ὅσα ἐγὼ μέμνημαι.
"Aye, and Prodicus the wise expresses himself to the like effect concerning Virtue in the essay 'On Heracles' that he recites to throngs of listeners. This, so far as I remember, is how he puts it:"

512. φησὶ γὰρ Ἡρακλέα, ἐπεὶ ἐκ παίδων εἰς ἥβην ὡρμᾶτο, ἐν ᾗ οἱ νέοι ἤδη αὐτοκράτορες γιγνόμενοι δηλοῦσιν εἴτε τὴν δι’ ἀρετῆς ὁδὸν τρέψονται ἐπὶ τὸν βίον εἴτε τὴν διὰ κακίας, ἐξελθόντα εἰς ἡσυχίαν καθῆσθαι ἀποροῦντα ποτέραν τῶν ὁδῶν τράπηται ·
"When Heracles was passing from boyhood to youth’s estate, wherein the young, now becoming their own masters, show whether they will approach life by the path of virtue or the path of vice, he went out into a quiet place, and sat pondering which road to
take."

513 καὶ φανῆναι αὐτῷ δύο γυναῖκας προσιέναι μεγάλας , τὴν μὲν ἑτέραν εὐπρεπῆ τε ἰδεῖν καὶ ἐλευθέριον φύσει , κεκοσμημένην τὸ μὲν σῶμα καθαρότητι , τὰ δὲ ὄμματα αἰδοῖ , τὸ δὲ σχῆμα σωφροσύνῃ , ἐσθῆτι δὲ λευκῇ , τὴν δ’ ἑτέραν τεθραμμένην μὲν εἰς πολυσαρκίαν τε καὶ ἁπαλότητα , κεκαλλωπισμένην δὲ τὸ μὲν χρῶμα ὥστε λευκοτέραν τε καὶ ἐρυθροτέραν τοῦ ὄντος δοκεῖν φαίνεσθαι , τὸ δὲ σχῆμα ὥστε δοκεῖν ὀρθοτέραν τῆς φύσεως εἶναι , τὰ δὲ ὄμματα ἔχειν ἀναπεπταμένα , ἐσθῆτα δὲ ἐξ ἧς ἂν μάλιστα ὥρα διαλάμποι ·
"And there appeared two women of great stature making towards him. The one was fair to see and of high bearing; and her limbs were adorned with purity, her eyes with modesty; sober was her figure, and her robe was white. The other was plump and soft, with high feeding. Her face was made up to heighten its natural white and pink, her figure to exaggerate her height. Open-eyed was she; and dressed so as to disclose all her charms. Now she eyed herself; anon looked whether any noticed her; and often stole a glance at her own shadow."

514	κατασκοπεῖσθαι δὲ θαμὰ ἑαυτήν , ἐπισκοπεῖν δὲ καὶ εἴ τις ἄλλος αὐτὴν θεᾶται , πολλάκις δὲ καὶ εἰς τὴν ἑαυτῆς σκιὰν ἀποβλέπειν .
"Now she eyed herself; anon looked whether any noticed her; and
often stole a glance at her own shadow."

515. ὡς δ’ ἐγένοντο πλησιαίτερον τοῦ Ἡρακλέους, τὴν μὲν πρόσθεν ῥηθεῖσαν ἰέναι τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον, τὴν δ’ ἑτέραν φθάσαι βουλομένην προσδραμεῖν τῷ Ἡρακλεῖ καὶ εἰπεῖν:
When they drew nigh to Heracles, the first pursued the even tenor of her way: but the other, all eager to outdo her, ran to meet him, crying:

516. ὁρῶ σε, ὦ Ἡράκλεις, ἀποροῦντα ποίαν ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τὸν βίον τράπῃ.
"Heracles, I see that you are in doubt which path to take towards life."

517. ἐὰν οὖν ἐμὲ φίλην ποιησάμενος, ἐπὶ τὴν ἡδίστην τε καὶ ῥᾴστην ὁδὸν ἄξω σε, καὶ τῶν μὲν τερπνῶν οὐδενὸς ἄγευστος ἔσει, τῶν δὲ χαλεπῶν ἄπειρος διαβιώσῃ.
"Make me your friend; follow me, and I will lead you along the pleasantest and easiest road. You shall taste all the sweets of life; and hardship you shall never know."

518. πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ οὐ πολέμων οὐδὲ πραγμάτων φροντιεῖς, ἀλλὰ σκοπούμενος διέσῃ τί ἂν κεχαρισμένον ἢ σιτίον ἢ ποτὸν εὕροις, ἢ τί ἂν ἰδὼν ἢ ἀκούσας τερφθείης ἢ τίνων ὀσφραινόμενος ἢ ἁπτόμενος, τίσι δὲ παιδικοῖς ὁμιλῶν μάλιστ’ ἂν εὐφρανθείης, καὶ πῶς ἂν μαλακώτατα καθεύδοις, καὶ πῶς ἂν ἀπονώτατα τούτων πάντων τυγχάνοις.
"First, of wars and worries you shall not think, but shall ever be considering what choice food or drink you can find, what sight or sound will delight you, what touch or perfume; what tender love can give you most joy, what bed the softest slumbers; and how to come by all these pleasures with least trouble."

519. ἐὰν δέ ποτε γένηταί τις ὑποψία σπάνεως ἀφ’ ὧν ἔσται ταῦτα, οὐ φόβος μή σε ἀγάγω ἐπὶ τὸ πονοῦντα καὶ ταλαιπωροῦντα τῷ σώματι καὶ τῇ ψυχῇ ταῦτα πορίζεσθαι, ἀλλ’ οἷς ἂν οἱ ἄλλοι ἐργάζωνται, τούτοις σὺ χρήσῃ, οὐδενὸς ἀπεχόμενος ὅθεν ἂν δυνατὸν ᾖ τι κερδᾶναι.
"And should there arise misgiving that lack of means may stint your enjoyments, never fear that I may lead you into winning them by toil and anguish of body and soul. Nay; you shall have the fruits of others’ toil, and refrain from nothing that can bring you gain."

520. πανταχόθεν γὰρ ὠφελεῖσθαι τοῖς ἐμοὶ συνοῦσιν ἐξουσίαν ἐγὼ παρέχω.
"For to my companions I give authority to pluck advantage where they will."

521. καὶ ὁ Ἡρακλῆς ἀκούσας ταῦτα, ὦ γύναι, ἔφη, ὄνομα δέ σοι τί ἐστιν;
"Now when Heracles heard this, he asked, 'Lady, pray what is your name?"

522. ἡ δέ, οἱ μὲν ἐμοὶ φίλοι, ἔφη, καλοῦσί με Εὐδαιμονίαν, οἱ δὲ μισοῦντές με ὑποκοριζόμενοι ὀνομάζουσι Κακίαν.
"My friends call me Happiness,' she said, 'but among those that hate me I am nicknamed Vice."

523 καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ἡ ἑτέρα γυνὴ προσελθοῦσα εἶπε ·  
Meantime the other had drawn near, and she said:

524 καὶ ἐγὼ ἥκω πρὸς σέ , ὦ Ἡράκλεις , εἰδυῖα τοὺς γεννήσαντάς σε καὶ τὴν φύσιν τὴν σὴν ἐν τῇ παιδείᾳ καταμαθοῦσα , ἐξ ὧν ἐλπίζω , εἰ τὴν πρὸς ἐμὲ ὁδὸν τράποιο , σφόδρ’ ἄν σε τῶν καλῶν καὶ σεμνῶν ἀγαθὸν ἐργάτην γενέσθαι καὶ ἐμὲ ἔτι πολὺ ἐντιμοτέραν καὶ ἐπ’ ἀγαθοῖς διαπρεπεστέραν φανῆναι .  
I, too, am come to you, Heracles: I know your parents and I have taken note of your character during the time of your education. Therefore, I hope that, if you take the road that leads to me, you will turn out a right good doer of high and noble deeds, and I shall be yet more highly honoured and more illustrious for the blessings I bestow.

525 οὐκ ἐξαπατήσω δέ σε προοιμίοις ἡδονῆς , ἀλλ’ ᾗπερ οἱ θεοὶ διέθεσαν τὰ ὄντα διηγήσομαι μετ’ ἀληθείας .  
But I will not deceive you by a pleasant prelude: I will rather tell you truly the things that are, as the gods have ordained them.

526 τῶν γὰρ ὄντων ἀγαθῶν καὶ καλῶν οὐδὲν ἄνευ πόνου καὶ ἐπιμελείας θεοὶ διδόασιν ἀνθρώποις , ἀλλ’ εἴτε τοὺς θεοὺς ἵλεως εἶναί σοι βούλει , θεραπευτέον τοὺς θεούς , εἴτε ὑπὸ φίλων ἐθέλεις ἀγαπᾶσθαι , τοὺς φίλους εὐεργετητέον , εἴτε ὑπό τινος πόλεως ἐπιθυμεῖς τιμᾶσθαι , τὴν πόλιν ὠφελητέον , εἴτε ὑπὸ τῆς Ἑλλάδος πάσης ἀξιοῖς ἐπ’ ἀρετῇ θαυμάζεσθαι , τὴν Ἑλλάδα πειρατέον εὖ ποιεῖν , εἴτε γῆν βούλει σοι καρποὺς ἀφθόνους φέρειν , τὴν γῆν θεραπευτέον , εἴτε ἀπὸ βοσκημάτων οἴει δεῖν πλουτίζεσθαι , τῶν βοσκημάτων ἐπιμελητέον , εἴτε διὰ πολέμου ὁρμᾷς αὔξεσθαι καὶ βούλει δύνασθαι τούς τε φίλους ἐλευθεροῦν καὶ τοὺς ἐχθροὺς χειροῦσθαι , τὰς πολεμικὰς τέχνας αὐτάς τε παρὰ τῶν ἐπισταμένων μαθητέον καὶ ὅπως αὐταῖς δεῖ χρῆσθαι ἀσκητέον ·
For of all things good and fair, the gods give nothing to an without toil and effort. If you want the favour of the gods, you must worship the gods: if you desire the love of friends, you must do good to your friends: if you covet honour from a city, you must aid that city: if you are fain to win the admiration of all Hellas for virtue, you must strive to do good to Hellas: if you want land to yield you fruits in abundance, you must cultivate that land: if you are resolved to get wealth from locks, you must care for those flocks: if you essay to grow great through war and want power to liberate your friends and subdue your foes, you must learn the arts of war from those who know them and must practise their right use:

527	εἰ δὲ καὶ τῷ σώματι βούλει δυνατὸς εἶναι , τῇ γνώμῃ ὑπηρετεῖν ἐθιστέον τὸ σῶμα καὶ γυμναστέον σὺν πόνοις καὶ ἱδρῶτι . 
if you want your body to be strong, you must accustom your body to be the servant of your mind, and train it with toil and sweat.

528	καὶ ἡ Κακία ὑπολαβοῦσα εἶπεν , ὥς φησι Πρόδικος ·
And Vice, as Prodicus tells, answered and said:

529	ἐννοεῖς , ὦ Ἡράκλεις , ὡς χαλεπὴν καὶ μακρὰν ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τὰς εὐφροσύνας ἡ γυνή σοι αὕτη διηγεῖται ;
"Heracles, mark you how hard and long is that road to joy, of which this woman tells?

530	ἐγὼ δὲ ῥᾳδίαν καὶ βραχεῖαν ὁδὸν ἐπὶ τὴν εὐδαιμονίαν ἄξω σε .
 but I will lead you by a short and easy road to happiness."
531	καὶ ἡ Ἀρετὴ εἶπεν ·
And Virtue said:

532	ὦ τλῆμον , τί δὲ σὺ ἀγαθὸν ἔχεις ;
"What good thing is thine, poor wretch,

533	ἢ τί ἡδὺ οἶσθα μηδὲν τούτων ἕνεκα πράττειν ἐθέλουσα ;
or what pleasant thing dost thou know, if thou wilt do nought to win them?

534	ἥτις οὐδὲ τὴν τῶν ἡδέων ἐπιθυμίαν ἀναμένεις , ἀλλὰ πρὶν ἐπιθυμῆσαι πάντων ἐμπίμπλασαι , πρὶν μὲν πεινῆν ἐσθίουσα , πρὶν δὲ διψῆν πίνουσα , ἵνα μὲν ἡδέως φάγῃς , ὀψοποιοὺς μηχανωμένη , ἵνα δὲ ἡδέως πίῃς , οἴνους τε πολυτελεῖς παρασκευάζῃ καὶ τοῦ θέρους χιόνα περιθέουσα ζητεῖς , ἵνα δὲ καθυπνώσῃς ἡδέως , οὐ μόνον τὰς στρωμνὰς μαλακάς , ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς κλίνας καὶ τὰ ὑπόβαθρα ταῖς κλίναις παρασκευάζῃ ·
Thou dost not even tarry for the desire of pleasant things, but fillest thyself with all things before thou desirest them, eating before thou art hungry, drinking before thou art thirsty, getting thee cooks, to give zest to eating, buying thee costly wines and running to and fro in search of snow in summer, to give zest to drinking; to soothe thy slumbers it is not enough for thee to buy soft coverlets, but thou must have frames for thy beds.

535	οὐ γὰρ διὰ τὸ πονεῖν , ἀλλὰ διὰ τὸ μηδὲν ἔχειν ὅ τι ποιῇς ὕπνου ἐπιθυμεῖς ·
For not toil, but the tedium of having nothing to do, makes thee long for sleep.

536	τὰ δ’ ἀφροδίσια πρὸ τοῦ δεῖσθαι ἀναγκάζεις , πάντα μηχανωμένη καὶ γυναιξὶ τοῖς ἀνδράσι χρωμένη ·
Thou dost rouse lust by many a trick, when there is no need, using men as women:

537	οὕτω γὰρ παιδεύεις τοὺς σεαυτῆς φίλους , τῆς μὲν νυκτὸς ὑβρίζουσα , τῆς δ’ ἡμέρας τὸ χρησιμώτατον κατακοιμίζουσα .
thus thou trainest thy friends, waxing wanton by night, consuming in sleep the best hours of day."

538 ἀθάνατος δὲ οὖσα ἐκ θεῶν μὲν ἀπέρριψαι, ὑπὸ δὲ ἀνθρώπων ἀγαθῶν ἀτιμάζῃ·
Immortal art thou, yet the outcast of the gods, the scorn of good men.

539 τοῦ δὲ πάντων ἡδίστου ἀκούσματος, ἐπαίνου σεαυτῆς, ἀνήκοος εἶ, καὶ τοῦ πάντων ἡδίστου θεάματος ἀθέατος·
Praise, sweetest of all things to hear, thou hearest not: the sweetest of all sights thou beholdest not,

540 οὐδὲν γὰρ πώποτε σεαυτῆς ἔργον καλὸν τεθέασαι.
for never yet hast thou beheld a good work wrought by thyself.

541 τίς δ’ ἄν σοι λεγούσῃ τι πιστεύσειε;
Who will believe what thou dost say?

542 τίς δ’ ἂν δεομένῃ τινὸς ἐπαρκέσειεν;
who will grant what thou dost ask?

543 ἢ τίς ἂν εὖ φρονῶν τοῦ σοῦ θιάσου τολμήσειεν εἶναι;
Or what sane man will dare join thy throng?

544 οἳ νέοι μὲν ὄντες τοῖς σώμασιν ἀδύνατοί εἰσι, πρεσβύτεροι δὲ γενόμενοι ταῖς ψυχαῖς ἀνόητοι, ἀπόνως μὲν λιπαροὶ διὰ νεότητος τρεφόμενοι, ἐπιπόνως δὲ αὐχμηροὶ διὰ γήρως περῶντες, τοῖς μὲν πεπραγμένοις αἰσχυνόμενοι, τοῖς δὲ πραττομένοις βαρυνόμενοι, τὰ μὲν ἡδέα ἐν τῇ νεότητι διαδραμόντες, τὰ δὲ χαλεπὰ εἰς τὸ γῆρας ἀποθέμενοι.
While thy votaries are young their bodies are weak, when they wax old, their souls are without sense; idle and sleek they thrive in youth, withered and weary they journey through old age, and their past deeds bring them shame, their present deeds distress. Pleasure they ran through in their youth: hardship they laid up for their old age.

545 ἐγὼ δὲ σύνειμι μὲν θεοῖς, σύνειμι δὲ ἀνθρώποις τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς·
But I company with gods and good men,

546 ἔργον δὲ καλὸν οὔτε θεῖον οὔτ’ ἀνθρώπειον χωρὶς ἐμοῦ γίγνεται.
and no fair deed of god or man is done without my aid.

547 τιμῶμαι δὲ μάλιστα πάντων καὶ παρὰ θεοῖς καὶ παρὰ ἀνθρώποις οἷς προσήκω, ἀγαπητὴ μὲν συνεργὸς τεχνίταις, πιστὴ δὲ φύλαξ οἴκων δεσπόταις, εὐμενὴς δὲ παραστάτις οἰκέταις, ἀγαθὴ δὲ συλλήπτρια τῶν ἐν εἰρήνῃ πόνων, βεβαία δὲ τῶν ἐν πολέμῳ σύμμαχος ἔργων, ἀρίστη δὲ φιλίας κοινωνός.
I am first in honour among the gods and among men that are akin to me: to craftsmen a beloved fellow-worker, to masters a faithful guardian of the house, to servants a kindly protector: good helpmate in the toils of peace, staunch ally in the deeds of war, best partner in friendship.

548 ἔστι δὲ τοῖς μὲν ἐμοῖς φίλοις ἡδεῖα μὲν καὶ ἀπράγμων σίτων καὶ ποτῶν ἀπόλαυσις·
To my friends meat and drink bring sweet and simple enjoyment:

549 ἀνέχονται γὰρ ἕως ἂν ἐπιθυμήσωσιν αὐτῶν·
for they wait till they crave them.

550 ὕπνος δ’ αὐτοῖς πάρεστιν ἡδίων ἢ τοῖς ἀμόχθοις, καὶ οὔτε ἀπολείποντες αὐτὸν ἄχθονται οὔτε διὰ τοῦτον μεθιᾶσι τὰ δέοντα πράττειν.
And a sweeter sleep falls on them than on idle folk: they are not vexed at awaking from it, nor for its sake do they neglect to do their duties.

551 καὶ οἱ μὲν νέοι τοῖς τῶν πρεσβυτέρων ἐπαίνοις χαίρουσιν, οἱ δὲ γεραίτεροι ταῖς τῶν νέων τιμαῖς ἀγάλλονται·
The young rejoice to win the praise of the old; the elders are glad to be honoured by the young;

552 καὶ ἡδέως μὲν τῶν παλαιῶν πράξεων μέμνηνται, εὖ δὲ τὰς παρούσας ἥδονται πράττοντες, δι’ ἐμὲ φίλοι μὲν θεοῖς ὄντες, ἀγαπητοὶ δὲ φίλοις, τίμιοι δὲ πατρίσιν·
With joy they recall their deeds past, and their present well-doing is joy to them, for through me they are dear to the gods, lovely to friends, precious to their native land.

553 ὅταν δ’ ἔλθῃ τὸ πεπρωμένον τέλος, οὐ μετὰ λήθης ἄτιμοι κεῖνται, ἀλλὰ μετὰ μνήμης τὸν ἀεὶ χρόνον ὑμνούμενοι θάλλουσι.
And when comes the appointed end, they lie not forgotten and dishonoured, but live on, sung and remembered for all time.

554 τοιαῦτά σοι, ὦ παῖ τοκέων ἀγαθῶν Ἡράκλεις, ἔξεστι διαπονησαμένῳ τὴν μακαριστοτάτην εὐδαιμονίαν κεκτῆσθαι.
O Heracles, thou son of goodly parents, if thou wilt labour earnestly on this wise, thou mayest have for thine own the most blessed happiness.

555 οὕτω πως διώκει Πρόδικος τὴν ὑπ’ Ἀρετῆς Ἡρακλέους παίδευσιν·
Such, in outline, is Prodicus’ story of the training of Heracles by Virtue; 

556 ἐκόσμησε μέντοι τὰς γνώμας ἔτι μεγαλειοτέροις ῥήμασιν ἢ ἐγὼ νῦν.
only he has clothed the thoughts in even finer phrases than I have done now.


557 σοὶ δ’ οὖν ἄξιον, ὦ Ἀρίστιππε, τούτων ἐνθυμουμένῳ πειρᾶσθαί τι καὶ τῶν εἰς τὸν μέλλοντα χρόνον τοῦ βίου φροντίζειν.
But anyhow, Aristippus, it were well that you should think on these things and try to show some regard for the life that lies before you.

558 αἰσθόμενος δέ ποτε Λαμπροκλέα τὸν πρεσβύτατον υἱὸν αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὴν μητέρα χαλεπαίνοντα, εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ παῖ, οἶσθά τινας ἀνθρώπους ἀχαρίστους καλουμένους;
On noticing that his eldest son, Lamprocles, was out of humour with his mother, he said: Tell me, my boy, do you know that some men are called ungrateful?

559 καὶ μάλα, ἔφη ὁ νεανίσκος.
Indeed I do, replied the young man.

560 καταμεμάθηκας οὖν τοὺς τί ποιοῦντας τὸ ὄνομα τοῦτο ἀποκαλοῦσιν;
Do you realize how they come to have this bad name?

561 ἔγωγ’, ἔφη·
I do; 

562 τοὺς γὰρ εὖ παθόντας, ὅταν δυνάμενοι χάριν ἀποδοῦναι μὴ ἀποδῶσιν, ἀχαρίστου καλοῦσιν.
the word is used of those who do not show the gratitude that it is in their power to show for benefits received.

563 οὐκοῦν δοκοῦσί σοι ἐν τοῖς ἀδίκοις καταλογίζεσθαι τοὺς ἀχαρίστους;
You take it, then, that the ungrateful are reckoned among the unjust?


564 ἔμοιγε, ἔφη.
Yes.

565 ἤδη δέ ποτ’ ἐσκέψω εἰ ἄρα, ὥσπερ τὸ ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι τοὺς μὲν φίλους ἄδικον εἶναι δοκεῖ, τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους δίκαιον εἶναι, οὕτω καὶ τὸ ἀχαριστεῖν πρὸς μὲν τοὺς φίλους ἄδικόν ἐστι, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς πολεμίους δίκαιον;
Now, seeing that enslavement is considered a just or an unjust act according as the victims are friends or enemies, have you ever considered whether the case of ingratitude is analogous, ingratitude being unjust towards friends, but just towards enemies?

566 καὶ μάλα, ἔφη·
Indeed I have;

567 καὶ δοκεῖ μοι, ὑφ’ οὗ ἄν τις εὖ παθὼν εἴτε φίλου εἴτε πολεμίου μὴ πειρᾶται χάριν ἀποδιδόναι, ἄδικος εἶναι.
and I think that it is always unjust not to show gratitude for a favour from whomsoever it is received, be he friend or enemy.

568 οὐκοῦν, εἴ γ’ οὕτως ἔχει τοῦτο, εἰλικρινής τις ἂν εἴη ἀδικία ἡ ἀχαριστία;
If that is so, must not ingratitude be injustice pure and simple?

569 συνωμολόγει.
He assented.

570 οὐκοῦν ὅσῳ ἄν τις μείζω ἀγαθὰ παθὼν μὴ ἀποδιδῷ χάριν, τοσούτῳ ἀδικώτερος ἂν εἴη;
Therefore the greater the benefits received the greater the injustice of not showing gratitude?

571 συνέφη καὶ τοῦτο.
He agreed again.

572 τίνας οὖν, ἔφη, ὑπὸ τίνων εὕροιμεν ἂν μείζω εὐηργετημένους ἢ παῖδας ὑπὸ γονέων;
Now what deeper obligation can we find than that of children to their parents?

573 οὓς οἱ γονεῖς ἐκ μὲν οὐκ ὄντων ἐποίησαν εἶναι, τοσαῦτα δὲ καλὰ ἰδεῖν καὶ τοσούτων ἀγαθῶν μετασχεῖν, ὅσα οἱ θεοὶ παρέχουσι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις;
To their parents children owe their being and their portion of all fair sights and all blessings that the gods bestow on men —

574 ἃ δὴ καὶ οὕτως ἡμῖν δοκεῖ παντὸς ἄξια εἶναι ὥστε πάντες τὸ καταλιπεῖν αὐτὰ πάντων μάλιστα φεύγομεν, καὶ αἱ πόλεις ἐπὶ τοῖς μεγίστοις ἀδικήμασι ζημίαν θάνατον πεποιήκασιν ὡς οὐκ ἂν μείζονος κακοῦ φόβῳ τὴν ἀδικίαν παύσαντες.
gifts so highly prized by us that all will sacrifice anything rather than lose them; and the reason why governments have made death the penalty for the greatest crimes is that the fear of it is the strongest deterrent against crime.

575 καὶ μὴν οὐ τῶν γε ἀφροδισίων ἕνεκα παιδοποιεῖσθαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ὑπολαμβάνεις, ἐπεὶ τούτου γε τῶν ἀπολυσόντων μεσταὶ μὲν αἱ ὁδοί, μεστὰ δὲ τὰ οἰκήματα.
Of course you don’t suppose that lust provokes men to beget children, when the streets and the stews are full of means to satisfy that?

576 φανεροὶ δ’ ἐσμὲν καὶ σκοπούμενοι ἐξ ὁποίων ἂν γυναικῶν βέλτιστα ἡμῖν τέκνα γένοιτο;
We obviously select for wives the women who will bear us the best children,

577 αἷς συνελθόντες τεκνοποιούμεθα.
and then marry them to raise a family.

578 καὶ ὁ μέν γε ἀνὴρ τήν τε συντεκνοποιήσουσαν ἑαυτῷ τρέφει καὶ τοῖς μέλλουσιν ἔσεσθαι παισὶ προπαρασκευάζει πάντα, ὅσα ἂν οἴηται συνοίσειν αὐτοῖς πρὸς τὸν βίον, καὶ ταῦτα ὡς ἂν δύνηται πλεῖστα·
The man supports the woman who is to share with him the duty of parentage and provides for the expected children whatever he thinks will contribute to their benefit in life, and accumulates as much of it as he can.

579 ἡ δὲ γυνὴ ὑποδεξαμένη τε φέρει τὸ φορτίον τοῦτο, βαρυνομένη τε καὶ κινδυνεύουσα περὶ τοῦ βίου καὶ μεταδιδοῦσα τῆς τροφῆς, ᾗ καὶ αὐτὴ τρέφεται, καὶ σὺν πολλῷ πόνῳ διενεγκοῦσα καὶ τεκοῦσα τρέφει τε καὶ ἐπιμελεῖται, οὔτε προπεπονθυῖα οὐδὲν ἀγαθὸν οὔτε γιγνῶσκον τὸ βρέφος ὑφ’ ὅτου εὖ πάσχει, οὐδὲ σημαίνειν δυνάμενον ὅτου δεῖται, ἀλλ’ αὐτὴ στοχαζομένη τά τε συμφέροντα καὶ τὰ κεχαρισμένα πειρᾶται ἐκπληροῦν, καὶ τρέφει πολὺν χρόνον καὶ ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτὸς ὑπομένουσα πονεῖν, οὐκ εἰδυῖα εἴ τινα τούτων χάριν ἀπολήψεται.
The woman conceives and bears her burden in travail, risking her life, and giving of her own food; and, with much labour, having endured to the end and brought forth her child, she rears and cares for it, although she has not received any good thing, and the babe neither recognizes its benefactress nor can make its wants known to her: still she guesses what is good for it and what it likes, and seeks to supply these things, and rears it for a long season, enduring toil day and night, nothing knowing what return she will get.

580 καὶ οὐκ ἀρκεῖ θρέψαι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καί, ἐπειδὰν δόξωσιν ἱκανοὶ εἶναι οἱ παῖδες μανθάνειν τι, ἃ μὲν ἂν αὐτοὶ ἔχωσιν οἱ γονεῖς ἀγαθὰ πρὸς τὸν βίον, διδάσκουσιν, ἃ δ’ ἂν οἴωνται ἄλλον ἱκανώτερον εἶναι διδάξαι, πέμπουσι πρὸς τοῦτον δαπανῶντες, καὶ ἐπιμελοῦνται πάντα ποιοῦντες ὅπως οἱ παῖδες αὐτοῖς γένωνται ὡς δυνατὸν βέλτιστοι.
Nor are the parents content just to supply food, but so soon as their children seem capable of learning they teach them what they can for their good, and if they think that another is more competent to teach them anything, they send them to him at a cost, and strive their utmost that the children may turn out as well as possible.

581 πρὸς ταῦτα ὁ νεανίσκος εἶπεν·
To this the young man replied: 

582 ἀλλά τοι εἰ καὶ πάντα ταῦτα πεποίηκε καὶ ἄλλα τούτων πολλαπλάσια, οὐδεὶς ἂν δύναιτο αὐτῆς ἀνασχέσθαι τὴν χαλεπότητα.
Nay, but even if she has done all this and far more than this, no one could put up with her vile temper.

583 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης, πότερα δέ, ἔφη, οἴει θηρίου ἀγριότητα δυσφορωτέραν εἶναι ἢ μητρός;
Which, think you, asked Socrates, is the harder to bear, a wild beast’s brutality or a mother’s?

584 ἐγὼ μὲν οἶμαι, ἔφη, τῆς μητρός, τῆς γε τοιαύτης.
I should say a mother’s, when she is like mine.

585 ἤδη πώποτε οὖν ἢ δακοῦσα κακόν τί σοι ἔδωκεν ἢ λακτίσασα, οἷα ὑπὸ θηρίων ἤδη πολλοὶ ἔπαθον;
Well now, many people get bitten or kicked by wild beasts; has she ever done you an injury of that sort?

586 ἀλλὰ νὴ Δία, ἔφη, λέγει ἃ οὐκ ἄν τις ἐπὶ τῷ βίῳ παντὶ βούλοιτο ἀκοῦσαι.
Oh no, but she says things one wouldn’t listen to for anything in the world.

587 σὺ δὲ πόσα, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, οἴει ταύτῃ δυσάνεκτα καὶ τῇ φωνῇ καὶ τοῖς ἔργοις ἐκ παιδίου δυσκολαίνων καὶ ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτὸς πράγματα παρασχεῖν, πόσα δὲ λυπῆσαι κάμνων;
Well, how much trouble do you think you have given her by your peevish words and froward acts day and night since you were a little child; and how much pain when you were ill?

588 ἀλλ’ οὐδεπώποτε αὐτήν, ἔφη, οὔτ’ εἶπα οὔτ’ ἐποίησα οὐδὲν ἐφ’ ᾧ ᾐσχύνθη.
But I have never yet said or done anything to cause her shame.

589 τί δ’;
What then?

590 οἴει, ἔφη, χαλεπώτερον εἶναί σοι ἀκούειν ὧν αὕτη λέγει ἢ τοῖς ὑποκριταῖς, ὅταν ἐν ταῖς τραγῳδίαις ἀλλήλους τὰ ἔσχατα λέγωσιν;
Now do you really think it harder for you to listen to what she says than for actors when they abuse one another in a tragedy?

591 ἀλλ’, οἶμαι, ἐπειδὴ οὐκ οἴονται τῶν λεγόντων οὔτε τὸν ἐλέγχοντα ἐλέγχειν ἵνα ζημιώσῃ οὔτε τὸν ἀπειλοῦντα ἀπειλεῖν ἵνα κακόν τι ποιήσῃ, ῥᾳδίως φέρουσι.
But an actor, I suppose, doesn’t think that a question put to him will lead to punishment, or that a threat means any harm: and so he makes light of it.

592 σὺ δ’ εὖ εἰδὼς ὅτι ἃ λέγει σοι ἡ μήτηρ οὐ μόνον οὐδὲν κακὸν νοοῦσα λέγει, ἀλλὰ καὶ βουλομένη σοι ἀγαθὰ εἶναι ὅσα οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ, χαλεπαίνεις;
And why should you be annoyed? You know well that there is no malice in what your mother says to you; on the contrary, she wishes you to be blessed above all other beings — 

593 ἢ νομίζεις κακόνουν τὴν μητέρα σοι εἶναι;
unless, indeed, you suppose that your mother is maliciously set against you?

594 οὐ δῆτα, ἔφη;
Oh no, he said,

595 τοῦτό γε οὐκ οἴομαι.
I don’t think that.

596 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης, οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, σὺ ταύτην, εὔνουν τέ σοι οὖσαν καὶ ἐπιμελομένην ὡς μάλιστα δύναται κάμνοντος ὅπως ὑγιάνῃς τε καὶ ὅπως τῶν ἐπιτηδείων μηδενὸς ἐνδεὴς ἔσει, καὶ πρὸς τούτοις πολλὰ τοῖς θεοῖς εὐχομένην ἀγαθὰ ὑπὲρ σοῦ καὶ εὐχὰς ἀποδιδοῦσαν, χαλεπὴν εἶναι φής;
Then Socrates exclaimed: So this mother of yours is kindly disposed towards you; she nurses you devotedly in sickness and sees that you want for nothing; more than that, she prays the gods to bless you abundantly and pays vows on your behalf; and yet you say she is a trial! 

597	ἐγὼ μὲν οἶμαι , εἰ τοιαύτην μὴ δύνασαι φέρειν μητέρα , τ- ἀγαθά σε οὐ δύνασθαι φέρειν .
It seems to me that, if you can’t endure a mother like her, you can’t endure a good thing.

598 εἰπὲ δέ μοι, ἔφη, πότερον ἄλλον τινὰ οἴει δεῖν θεραπεύειν;
Now tell me, is there any other being whom you feel bound to regard?

599 ἢ παρεσκεύασαι μηδενὶ ἀνθρώπων πειρᾶσθαι ἀρέσκειν μηδὲ πείθεσθαι μήτε στρατηγῷ μήτε ἄλλῳ ἄρχοντι;
Or are you set on trying to please nobody, and obeying neither general nor other ruler?

600 ναὶ μὰ Δί’ ἔγωγε, ἔφη.
Of course not!

601 οὐκοῦν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, καὶ τῷ γείτονι βούλῃ σὺ ἀρέσκειν, ἵνα σοι καὶ πῦρ ἐναύῃ, ὅταν τούτου δέῃ, καὶ ἀγαθοῦ τέ σοι γίγνηται συλλήπτωρ καί, ἄν τι σφαλλόμενος τύχῃς, εὐνοϊκῶς ἐγγύθεν βοηθῇ σοι;
Do you want to please your neighbour, for instance, so that he may kindle a fire for you at your need, may support you in prosperity, and in case of accident or failure may be ready to hold out a helping hand?

602 ἔγωγε, ἔφη.
Yes, I do.

603 τί δέ;
What then?

604 συνοδοιπόρον ἢ σύμπλουν, ἢ εἴ τῳ ἄλλῳ ἐντυγχάνοις, οὐδὲν ἄν σοι διαφέροι φίλον ἢ ἐχθρὸν γενέσθαι, ἢ καὶ τῆς παρὰ τούτων εὐνοίας οἴει δεῖν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι;
When you find yourself with a travelling companion on land or at sea, or happen to meet anyone, is it a matter of indifference to you whether he prove a friend or an enemy? Or do you think his goodwill worth cultivating? 

605	ἔγωγε , ἔφη .
Yes, I do.

606 εἶτα τούτων μὲν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι παρεσκεύασαι, τὴν δὲ μητέρα τὴν πάντων μάλιστά σε φιλοῦσαν οὐκ οἴει δεῖν θεραπεύειν;
And yet, when you are resolved to cultivate these, you don’t think courtesy is due to your mother, who loves you more than all?

607 οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι καὶ ἡ πόλις ἄλλης μὲν ἀχαριστίας οὐδεμιᾶς ἐπιμελεῖται οὐδὲ δικάζει, ἀλλὰ περιορᾷ τοὺς εὖ πεπονθότας χάριν οὐκ ἀποδόντας, ἐὰν δέ τις γονέας μὴ θεραπεύῃ, τούτῳ δίκην τε ἐπιτίθησι καὶ ἀποδοκιμάζουσα οὐκ ἐᾷ ἄρχειν τοῦτον, ὡς οὔτε ἂν τὰ ἱερὰ εὐσεβῶς θυόμενα ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως τούτου θύοντος οὔτε ἄλλο καλῶς καὶ δικαίως οὐδὲν ἂν τούτου πράξαντος;
Don’t you know that even the state ignores all other forms of ingratitude and pronounces no judgment on them, caring nothing if the recipient of a favour neglects to thank his benefactor, but inflicts penalties on the man who is discourteous to his parents and rejects him as unworthy of office, holding that it would be a sin for him to offer sacrifices on behalf of the state and that he is unlikely to do anything else honourably and rightly?

608 καὶ νὴ Δία ἐάν τις τῶν γονέων τελευτησάντων τοὺς τάφους μὴ κοσμῇ, καὶ τοῦτο ἐξετάζει ἡ πόλις ἐν ταῖς τῶν ἀρχόντων δοκιμασίαις.
Aye, and if one fail to honour his parents’ graves, the state inquires into that too, when it examines the candidates for office.

609 σὺ οὖν, ὦ παῖ, ἐὰν σωφρονῇς, τοὺς μὲν θεοὺς παραιτήσῃ συγγνώμονάς σοι εἶναι, εἴ τι παρημέληκας τῆς μητρός, μή σε καὶ οὗτοι νομίσαντες ἀχάριστον εἶναι οὐκ ἐθελήσωσιν εὖ ποιεῖν, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους φυλάξῃ μή σε αἰσθόμενοι τῶν γονέων ἀμελοῦντα πάντες ἀτιμάσωσιν, εἶτα ἐν ἐρημίᾳ φίλων ἀναφανῇς.
Therefore, my boy, if you are prudent, you will pray the gods to pardon your neglect of your mother, lest they in turn refuse to be kind to you, thinking you an ingrate; and you will beware of men, lest all cast you out, perceiving that you care nothing for your parents, and in the end you are found to be without a friend.

610 εἰ γάρ σε ὑπολάβοιεν πρὸς τοὺς γονέας ἀχάριστον εἶναι, οὐδεὶς ἂν νομίσειεν εὖ σε ποιήσας χάριν ἀπολήψεσθαι.
For, should men suppose you to be ungrateful to your parents, none would think you would be grateful for any kindness he might show you.

611 Χαιρεφῶντα δέ ποτε καὶ Χαιρεκράτην, ἀδελφὼ μὲν ὄντε ἀλλήλοιν, ἑαυτῷ δὲ γνωρίμω, αἰσθόμενος διαφερομένω, ἰδὼν τὸν Χαιρεκράτην, εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Χαιρέκρατες, οὐ δήπου καὶ σὺ εἶ τῶν τοιούτων ἀνθρώπων, οἳ χρησιμώτερον νομίζουσι χρήματα ἢ ἀδελφούς;
On another occasion he found that two brothers, Chaerophon and Chaerecrates, whom he knew well, were quarrelling. On seeing the latter, he cried, Surely, Chaerecrates, you are not one of those who hold that there is more value in goods and chattels than in a brother, 

612 καὶ ταῦτα τῶν μὲν ἀφρόνων ὄντων, τοῦ δὲ φρονίμου, καὶ τῶν μὲν βοηθείας δεομένων, τοῦ δὲ βοηθεῖν δυναμένου, καὶ πρὸς τούτοις τῶν μὲν πλειόνων ὑπαρχόντων, τοῦ δὲ ἑνός.
when they are senseless but he is sensible; they are helpless but he is helpful; when, moreover, you have many goods, but only one brother.

613 θαυμαστὸν δὲ καὶ τοῦτο, εἴ τις τοὺς μὲν ἀδελφοὺς ζημίαν ἡγεῖται, ὅτι οὐ καὶ τὰ τῶν ἀδελφῶν κέκτηται, τοὺς δὲ πολίτας οὐχ ἡγεῖται ζημίαν, ὅτι οὐ καὶ τὰ τῶν πολιτῶν ἔχει, ἀλλ’ ἐνταῦθα μὲν δύνανται λογίζεσθαι ὅτι κρεῖττον σὺν πολλοῖς οἰκοῦντα ἀσφαλῶς τ- ἀρκοῦντα ἔχειν ἢ μόνον διαιτώμενον τὰ τῶν πολιτῶν ἐπικινδύνως πάντα κεκτῆσθαι, ἐπὶ δὲ τῶν ἀδελφῶν τὸ αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἀγνοοῦσι·
It is strange too that a man should think he loses by his brothers because he cannot have their possessions as well as his own, and yet should not think that he loses by his fellow-citizens because their possessions are not his; and whereas in this case men can reflect that it is better to belong to a community, secure in the possession of a sufficiency, than to dwell in solitude with a precarious hold on all the property of their fellow-citizens, they fail to see that the same principle applies to brothers.

614 καὶ οἰκέτας μὲν οἱ δυνάμενοι ὠνοῦνται, ἵνα συνεργοὺς ἔχωσι, καὶ φίλους κτῶνται, ὡς βοηθῶν δεόμενοι, τῶν δ’ ἀδελφῶν ἀμελοῦσιν, ὥσπερ ἐκ πολιτῶν μὲν γιγνομένους φίλους, ἐξ ἀδελφῶν δὲ οὐ γιγνομένους.
Again, those who have the means buy servants to relieve them of work, and make friends because they feel the need of help; but they care nothing for their brothers, as though friendship can exist between fellow-citizens, but not between brothers!

615 καὶ μὴν πρὸς φιλίαν μέγα μὲν ὑπάρχει τὸ ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν φῦναι, μέγα δὲ τὸ ὁμοῦ τραφῆναι, ἐπεὶ καὶ τοῖς θηρίοις πόθος τις ἐγγίγνεται τῶν συντρόφων·
Yet common parentage and common upbringing are strong ties of affection, for even brute beasts reared together feel a natural yearning for one another.

616 πρὸς δὲ τούτοις καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ἄνθρωποι τιμῶσί τε μᾶλλον τοὺς συναδέλφους ὄντας τῶν ἀναδέλφων καὶ ἧττον τούτοις ἐπιτίθενται.
Besides, our fellow-men respect those of us who have brothers more than those who have none, and are less ready to quarrel with them.

617 καὶ ὁ Χαιρεκράτης εἶπεν·
Chaerecrates said:

618 ἀλλ’ εἰ μέν, ὦ Σώκρατες, μὴ μέγα εἴη τὸ διάφορον, ἴσως ἂν δέοι φέρειν τὸν ἀδελφὸν καὶ μὴ μικρῶν ἕνεκα φεύγειν·
If only the difference between us were a slight one, Socrates, it might perhaps be my duty to put up with my brother and not allow trifles to separate us.

619 ἀγαθὸν γάρ, ὥσπερ καὶ σὺ λέγεις, ἀδελφὸς ὢν οἷον δεῖ·
For a brother who behaves like a brother is, as you say, a blessing;

620 ὁπότε μέντοι παντὸς ἐνδέοι καὶ πᾶν τὸ ἐναντιώτατον εἴη, τί ἄν τις ἐπιχειροίη τοῖς ἀδυνάτοις;
but if his conduct is nothing like that, and is, in fact, just the opposite of what it should be, what is the use of attempting impossibilities?

621 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη·
And Socrates said:


622 πότερα δέ, ὦ Χαιρέκρατες, οὐδενὶ ἀρέσαι δύναται Χαιρεφῶν, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ σοί, ἢ ἔστιν οἷς καὶ πάνυ ἀρέσκει;
"Does everyone find Chaerophon as disagreeable as you do, Chaerecrates, or do some people think him very pleasant?" 

623 διὰ τοῦτο γάρ τοι, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἄξιόν ἐστιν ἐμοὶ μισεῖν αὐτόν, ὅτι ἄλλοις μὲν ἀρέσκειν δύναται, ἐμοὶ δὲ ὅπου ἂν παρῇ πανταχοῦ καὶ ἔργῳ καὶ λόγῳ ζημία μᾶλλον ἢ ὠφέλειά ἐστιν.
"Ah, Socrates," replied he, "this is precisely my reason for hating him: he is pleasant enough to other people, but whenever he is near me, he invariably says and does more to hurt than to help me."

624 ἆρ’ οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ὥσπερ ἵππος τῷ ἀνεπιστήμονι μέν, ἐγχειροῦντι δὲ χρῆσθαι ζημία ἐστίν, οὕτω καὶ ἀδελφός, ὅταν τις αὐτῷ μὴ ἐπιστάμενος ἐγχειρῇ χρῆσθαι, ζημία ἐστί;
"Well now," said Socrates, "if you try to manage a horse without knowing the right way, he hurts you. Is it so with a brother? Does he hurt if you try to deal with him when you don’t know the way?"

625 πῶς δ’ ἂν ἐγώ, ἔφη ὁ Χαιρεκράτης, ἀνεπιστήμων εἴην ἀδελφῷ χρῆσθαι, ἐπιστάμενός γε καὶ εὖ λέγειν τὸν εὖ λέγοντα καὶ εὖ ποιεῖν τὸν εὖ ποιοῦντα;
"What," exclaimed Chaerecrates, "don’t I know how to deal with a brother, when I know how to requite a kind word and a generous deed? 

626 τὸν μέντοι καὶ λόγῳ καὶ ἔργῳ πειρώμενον ἐμὲ ἀνιᾶν οὐκ ἂν δυναίμην οὔτ’ εὖ λέγειν οὔτ’ εὖ ποιεῖν, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ πειράσομαι.
But I can’t speak or act kindly to one who tries to annoy me by his words and actions — and what’s more, I won’t try."

627 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη·
Socrates said:


628 θαυμαστά γε λέγεις, ὦ Χαιρέκρατες, εἰ κύνα μέν, εἴ σοι ἦν ἐπὶ προβάτοις ἐπιτήδειος ὢν καὶ τοὺς μὲν ποιμένας ἠσπάζετο, σοὶ δὲ προσιόντι ἐχαλέπαινεν, ἀμελήσας ἂν τοῦ ὀργίζεσθαι ἐπειρῶ εὖ ποιήσας πραΰνειν αὐτόν, τὸν δὲ ἀδελφὸν φὴς μὲν μέγα ἀγαθὸν εἶναι ὄντα πρὸς σὲ οἷον δεῖ, ἐπίστασθαι δὲ ὁμολογῶν καὶ εὖ ποιεῖν καὶ εὖ λέγειν οὐκ ἐπιχειρεῖς μηχανᾶσθαι ὅπως σοι ὡς βέλτιστος ᾖ.
"Chaerecrates, you astonish me! Had you a sheep dog that was friendly to the shepherds, but growled when you came near him, it would never occur to you to get angry, but you would try to tame him by kindness. You say that, if your brother treated you like a brother, he would be a great blessing, and you confess that you know how to speak and act kindly: yet you don’t set yourself to contriving that he shall be the greatest possible blessing to you." 

629 καὶ ὁ Χαιρεκράτης, δέδοικα, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, μὴ οὐκ ἔχω ἐγὼ τοσαύτην σοφίαν ὥστε Χαιρεφῶντα ποιῆσαι πρὸς ἐμὲ οἷον δεῖ.
"I fear, Socrates, that I lack the wisdom to make Chaerophon treat me as he should," said Chaerecrates.

630 καὶ μὴν οὐδέν γε ποικίλον, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, οὐδὲ καινὸν δεῖ ἐπ’ αὐτόν, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ, μηχανᾶσθαι, οἷς δὲ καὶ σὺ ἐπίστασαι αὐτὸς οἴομαι ἂν αὐτὸν ἁλόντα περὶ πολλοῦ ποιεῖσθαί σε.
"And yet, there is no need, so far as I see, of any subtle or strange contriving on your part: I think you know the way to win him and to get his good opinion," said Socrates.

631 οὐκ ἂν φθάνοις, ἔφη, λέγων, εἴ τι ᾔσθησαί με φίλτρον ἐπιστάμενον ὃ ἐγὼ εἰδὼς λέληθα ἐμαυτόν.
"If you have observed that I know some spell without being conscious of my knowledge, pray tell me at once," said Chaerecrates.

632 λέγε δή μοι, ἔφη, εἴ τινα τῶν γνωρίμων βούλοιο κατεργάσασθαι, ὁπότε θύοι, καλεῖν σε ἐπὶ δεῖπνον, τί ἂν ποιοίης;
"Then tell me, now; if you wanted to get an invitation to dine with an acquaintance when he offers sacrifice, what would you do?" asked Socrates.

633 δῆλον ὅτι κατάρχοιμ' ἂν τοῦ αὐτός, ὅτε θύοιμι, καλεῖν ἐκεῖνον.
"Of course I should begin by inviting him myself when I offered sacrifice," replied Chaerecrates.

634 εἰ δὲ βούλοιο τῶν φίλων τινὰ προτρέψασθαι, ὁπότε ἀποδημοίης, ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τῶν σῶν, τί ἂν ποιοίης;
"And suppose you wanted to encourage one of your friends to look after your affairs during your absence from home, what would you do?" Socrates continued.

635 δῆλον ὅτι πρότερος ἂν ἐγχειροίην ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τῶν ἐκείνου, ὁπότε ἀποδημοίη.
"Of course I should first undertake to look after his affairs in his absence," answered Chaerecrates.

636 εἰ δὲ βούλοιο ξένον ποιῆσαι ὑποδέχεσθαι σεαυτόν, ὁπότε ἔλθοις εἰς τὴν ἐκείνου, τί ἂν ποιοίης;
"And suppose you wanted a stranger to entertain you when you visited his city, what would you do?" asked Socrates.

637 δῆλον ὅτι καὶ τοῦτον πρότερος ὑποδεχοίμην ἄν, ὁπότε ἔλθοι Ἀθήναζε·
"Obviously I should first entertain him when he came to Athens. 

 replied Chaerecrates.

638 καὶ εἴ γε βουλοίμην αὐτὸν προθυμεῖσθαι διαπράττειν μοι ἐφ’ ἃ ἥκοιμι, δῆλον ὅτι καὶ τοῦτο δέοι ἂν πρότερον αὐτὸν ἐκείνῳ ποιεῖν.
Yes, and if I wanted him to show himself eager in forwarding the business on which I had come, it is obvious that I should first have to do the same by him."


639 πάντ’ ἄρα σύγε τὰ ἐν ἀνθρώποις φίλτρα ἐπιστάμενος πάλαι ἀπεκρύπτου·
"It seems that you have long concealed a knowledge of all spells that were ever discovered."

640 ἢ ὀκνεῖς, ἔφη, ἄρξαι, μὴ αἰσχρὸς φανῇς, ἐὰν πρότερος τὸν ἀδελφὸν εὖ ποιῇς;
"Or is it that you hesitate to make a beginning," he said, "for fear of disgracing yourself by first showing kindness to your brother?" Socrates continued.

641 καὶ μὴν πλείστου γε δοκεῖ ἀνὴρ ἐπαίνου ἄξιος εἶναι, ὃς ἂν φθάνῃ τοὺς μὲν πολεμίους κακῶς ποιῶν, τοὺς δὲ φίλους εὐεργετῶν.
"Yet it is generally thought worthy of the highest praise to anticipate the malevolence of an enemy and the benevolence of a friend," Socrates explained.

642 εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐδόκει μοι Χαιρεφῶν ἡγεμονικώτερος εἶναι σοῦ πρὸς τὴν φιλίαν ταύτην, ἐκεῖνον ἂν ἐπειρώμην πείθειν πρότερον ἐγχειρεῖν τῷ σὲ φίλον ποιεῖσθαι·
"So if I thought Chaerophon more capable than you of showing the way to this friendship, I would try to persuade him to take the first step towards an understanding with you," said Socrates.

643 νῦν δέ μοι σὺ δοκεῖς ἡγούμενος μᾶλλον ἂν ἐξεργάσασθαι τοῦτο.
"But as things are, I think the enterprise more likely to succeed under your direction," Socrates added.

644 καὶ ὁ Χαιρεκράτης εἶπεν·
And Chaerecrates said:

645 ἄτοπα λέγεις, ὦ Σώκρατες, καὶ οὐδαμῶς πρὸς σοῦ, ὅς γε κελεύεις ἐμὲ νεώτερον ὄντα καθηγεῖσθαι·
"Strange sentiments, these, Socrates! It’s quite unlike you to urge me, the junior, to lead the way!" 

646 καίτοι τούτου γε παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις τ- ἐναντία νομίζεται, τὸν πρεσβύτερον ἡγεῖσθαι παντὸς καὶ λόγου καὶ ἔργου.
"And surely all hold the contrary opinion, that the senior, I mean, should always act and speak first," he added.

647	πῶς ;
"How so?"

648 ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης·
Socrates said:

649 οὐ γὰρ καὶ ὁδοῦ παραχωρῆσαι τὸν νεώτερον πρεσβυτέρῳ συντυγχάνοντι πανταχοῦ νομίζεται καὶ καθήμενον ὑπαναστῆναι καὶ κοίτῃ μαλακῇ τιμῆσαι καὶ λόγῳ ὑπεῖξαι;
"Is it not the general opinion that a young man should make way for an older when they meet, offer his seat to him, give him a comfortable bed, let him have the first word?"

650 ὠγαθέ, μὴ ὄκνει, ἔφη, ἀλλ’ ἐγχείρει τὸν ἄνδρα καταπραΰνειν, καὶ πάνυ ταχύ σοι ὑπακούσεται·
"My good friend, don’t hesitate, but take up the task of pacifying your man, and in no time he will respond to your overtures."

651 οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὡς φιλότιμός ἐστι καὶ ἐλευθέριος;
"Don’t you see how keen and frank he is?"

652 τὰ μὲν γὰρ πονηρὰ ἀνθρώπια οὐκ ἂν ἄλλως μᾶλλον ἕλοις ἢ εἰ δοίης τι, τοὺς δὲ καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς ἀνθρώπους προσφιλῶς χρώμενος μάλιστ’ ἂν κατεργάσαιο.
"Low fellows, it is true, yield most readily to gifts, but kindness is the weapon most likely to prevail with a gentleman."

653 καὶ ὁ Χαιρεκράτης εἶπεν·
And Chaerecrates said:

654 ἐὰν οὖν ἐμοῦ ταῦτα ποιοῦντος ἐκεῖνος μηδὲν βελτίων γίγνηται;
"And what if all my efforts lead to no improvement?"

655 τί γὰρ ἄλλο, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἢ κινδυνεύσεις ἐπιδεῖξαι σὺ μὲν χρηστός τε καὶ φιλάδελφος εἶναι, ἐκεῖνος δὲ φαῦλός τε καὶ οὐκ ἄξιος εὐεργεσίας;
"Well, in that case, I presume you will have shown that you are honest and brotherly, he that he is base and unworthy of kindness," said Socrates.

656 ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν οἶμαι τούτων ἔσεσθαι·
"But I am confident that no such result will follow;"

657 νομίζω γὰρ αὐτόν, ἐπειδὰν αἴσθηταί σε προκαλούμενον ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὸν ἀγῶνα τοῦτον, πάνυ φιλονικήσειν ὅπως περιγένηταί σου καὶ λόγῳ καὶ ἔργῳ εὖ ποιῶν.
"for I think that, as soon as he is aware of your challenge to this contest, he will be all eagerness to outdo your kind words and actions."

658 νῦν μὲν γὰρ οὕτως, ἔφη, διάκεισθον, ὥσπερ εἰ τὼ χεῖρε, ἃς ὁ θεὸς ἐπὶ τῷ συλλαμβάνειν ἀλλήλοιν ἐποίησεν, ἀφεμένω τούτου τράποιντο πρὸς τὸ διακωλύειν ἀλλήλω, ἢ εἰ τὼ πόδε θείᾳ μοίρᾳ πεποιημένω πρὸς τὸ συνεργεῖν ἀλλήλοιν, ἀμελήσαντε τούτου ἐμποδίζοιεν ἀλλήλω.
"What if a pair of hands refused the office of mutual help for which God made them, and tried to thwart each other; or if a pair of feet neglected the duty of working together, for which they were fashioned, and took to hampering each other? That is how you two are behaving at present." 

659 οὐκ ἂν πολλὴ ἀμαθία εἴη καὶ κακοδαιμονία τοῖς ἐπ’ ὠφελείᾳ πεποιημένοις ἐπὶ βλάβῃ χρῆσθαι;
"Would it not be utterly senseless and disastrous to use for hindrance instruments that were made for help?"

660 καὶ μὴν ἀδελφώ γε, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ, ὁ θεὸς ἐποίησεν ἐπὶ μείζονι ὠφελείᾳ ἀλλήλοιν ἢ χεῖρέ τε καὶ πόδε καὶ ὀφθαλμὼ καὶ τ- ἄλλα ὅσα ἀδελφὰ ἔφυσεν ἀνθρώποις.
"And, moreover, a pair of brothers, in my judgment, were made by God to render better service one to the other than a pair of hands and feet and eyes and all the instruments that he meant to be used as fellows."

661 χεῖρες μὲν γάρ, εἰ δέοι αὐτὰς τὰ πλέον ὀργυιᾶς διέχοντα ἅμα ποιῆσαι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιντο, πόδες δὲ οὐδ’ ἂν ἐπὶ τὰ ὀργυιὰν διέχοντα ἔλθοιεν ἅμα, ὀφθαλμοὶ δὲ οἱ δοκοῦντες ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἐξικνεῖσθαι οὐδ’ ἂν τῶν ἔτι ἐγγυτέρω ὄντων τὰ ἔμπροσθεν ἅμα καὶ τὰ ὄπισθεν ἰδεῖν δύναιντο·
"For the hands cannot deal simultaneously with things that are more than six feet or so apart: the feet cannot reach in a single stride things that are even six feet apart: and the eyes, though they seem to have a longer range, cannot at the same moment see things still nearer than that, if some are in front and some behind."

662 ἀδελφὼ δέ, φίλω ὄντε, καὶ πολὺ διεστῶτε πράττετον ἅμα καὶ ἐπ’ ὠφελείᾳ ἀλλήλοιν.
"But two brothers, when they are friends, act simultaneously for mutual benefit, however far parted one from the other."

663 ἤκουσα δέ ποτε αὐτοῦ καὶ περὶ φίλων διαλεγομένου ἐξ ὧν ἔμοιγε ἐδόκει μάλιστ’ ἄν τις ὠφελεῖσθαι πρὸς φίλων κτῆσίν τε καὶ χρείαν.
"Again, I once heard him give a discourse on friendship that was likely, as I thought, to help greatly in the acquisition and use of friends."

664 τοῦτο μὲν γὰρ δὴ πολλῶν ἔφη ἀκούειν, ὡς πάντων κτημάτων κράτιστον ἂν εἴη φίλος σαφὴς καὶ ἀγαθός·
"For he said that he often heard it stated that of all possessions the most precious is a good and sincere friend."

665 ἐπιμελομένους δὲ παντὸς μᾶλλον ὁρᾶν ἔφη τοὺς πολλοὺς ἢ φίλων κτήσεως.
"And yet, there is no transaction most men are so careless about as the acquisition of friends."

666 καὶ γὰρ οἰκίας καὶ ἀγροὺς καὶ ἀνδράποδα καὶ βοσκήματα καὶ σκεύη κτωμένους τε ἐπιμελῶς ὁρᾶν ἔφη καὶ τὰ ὄντα σῴζειν πειρωμένους, φίλον δέ, ὃ μέγιστον ἀγαθὸν εἶναί φασιν, ὁρᾶν ἔφη τοὺς πολλοὺς οὔτε ὅπως κτήσωνται φροντίζοντας οὔτε ὅπως οἱ ὄντες αὐτοῖς σῴζωνται.
"For I find that they are careful about getting houses and lands and slaves and cattle and furniture, and anxious to keep what they have; but though they tell one that a friend is the greatest blessing, I find that most men take no thought how to get new friends or how to keep their old ones."

667 ἀλλὰ καὶ καμνόντων φίλων τε καὶ οἰκετῶν ὁρᾶν τινας ἔφη τοῖς μὲν οἰκέταις καὶ ἰατροὺς εἰσάγοντας καὶ τ- ἄλλα τὰ πρὸς ὑγίειαν ἐπιμελῶς παρασκευάζοντας, τῶν δὲ φίλων ὀλιγωροῦντας, ἀποθανόντων τε ἀμφοτέρων ἐπὶ μὲν τοῖς οἰκέταις ἀχθομένους τε καὶ ζημίαν ἡγουμένους, ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς φίλοις οὐδὲν οἰομένους ἐλαττοῦσθαι, καὶ τῶν μὲν ἄλλων κτημάτων οὐδὲν ἐῶντας ἀθεράπευτον οὐδ’ ἀνεπίσκεπτον, τῶν δὲ φίλων ἐπιμελείας δεομένων ἀμελοῦντας.
"Indeed, if one of their friends and one of their servants fall ill at the same time, I find that some call in the doctor to attend the servant and are careful to provide everything that may contribute to his recovery, whereas they take no heed of the friend. In the event of both dying, they are vexed at losing the servant, but don’t feel that the death of the friend matters in the least. And though none of their other possessions is uncared for and unconsidered, they are deaf to their friends’ need of attention."

668 ἔτι δὲ πρὸς τούτοις ὁρᾶν ἔφη τοὺς πολλοὺς τῶν μὲν ἄλλων κτημάτων, καὶ πάνυ πολλῶν αὐτοῖς ὄντων, τὸ πλῆθος εἰδότας, τῶν δὲ φίλων, ὀλίγων ὄντων, οὐ μόνον τὸ πλῆθος ἀγνοοῦντας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖς πυνθανομένοις τοῦτο καταλέγειν ἐγχειρήσαντας, οὓς ἐν τοῖς φίλοις ἔθεσαν, πάλιν τούτους ἀνατίθεσθαι.
"And besides all this, I find that most men know the number of their other possessions, however great it may be, yet cannot tell the number of their friends, few as they are; and, if they are asked and try to make a list, they will insert names and presently remove them. So much for the thought they give to their friends!"

669 τοσοῦτον αὐτοὺς τῶν φίλων φροντίζειν.
"So much for the thought they give to their friends!"

670 καίτοι πρὸς ποῖον κτῆμα τῶν ἄλλων παραβαλλόμενος φίλος ἀγαθὸς οὐκ ἂν πολλῷ κρείττων φανείη;  
"Yet surely there is no other possession that can compare with a good friend."

671 ποῖος γὰρ ἵππος ἢ ποῖον ζεῦγος οὕτω χρήσιμον ὥσπερ ὁ χρηστὸς φίλος;  
"For what horse, what yoke of oxen is so good a servant as the good friend?"

672 ποῖον δὲ ἀνδράποδον οὕτως εὔνουν καὶ παραμόνιμον;  
"What slave so loyal and constant?"

673 ἢ ποῖον ἄλλο κτῆμα οὕτω πάγχρηστον;  
"Or what possession so serviceable?"

674 ὁ γὰρ ἀγαθὸς φίλος ἑαυτὸν τάττει πρὸς πᾶν τὸ ἐλλεῖπον τῷ φίλῳ καὶ τῆς τῶν ἰδίων κατασκευῆς καὶ τῶν κοινῶν πράξεων, καί, ἄν τέ τινα εὖ ποιῆσαι δέῃ, συνεπισχύει, ἄν τέ τις φόβος ταράττῃ, συμβοηθεῖ, τὰ μὲν συναναλίσκων, τὰ δὲ συμπράττων, καὶ τὰ μὲν συμπείθων, τὰ δὲ βιαζόμενος, καὶ εὖ μὲν πράττοντας πλεῖστα εὐφραίνων, σφαλλομένους δὲ πλεῖστα ἐπανορθῶν.  
"The good friend is on the watch to supply whatever his friend wants for building up his private fortune and forwarding his public career. If generosity is called for, he does his part: if fear harasses, he comes to the rescue, shares expenses, helps to persuade, bears down opposition: he is foremost in delighting him when he is prosperous and raising him up when he falls."

675 ἃ δὲ αἵ τε χεῖρες ἑκάστῳ ὑπηρετοῦσι καὶ οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ προορῶσι καὶ τὰ ὦτα προακούουσι καὶ οἱ πόδες διανύτουσι, τούτων φίλος εὐεργετῶν οὐδενὸς λείπεται.  
"Of all that a man can do with his hands, see for himself with his eyes, hear for himself with his ears or accomplish with his feet, in nothing is a friend backward in helping."

676 πολλάκις ἃ πρὸ αὑτοῦ τις ἢ οὐκ ἐξειργάσατο ἢ οὐκ εἶδεν ἢ οὐκ ἤκουσεν ἢ οὐ διήνυσε, ταῦτα ὁ φίλος πρὸ τοῦ φίλου ἐξήρκεσεν. 
Often, what someone on his own behalf either did not complete or did not see or did not hear about or did not get to, these things a friend has taken care of for a friend." 


677 ἀλλ’ ὅμως ἔνιοι δένδρα μὲν πειρῶνται θεραπεύειν τοῦ καρποῦ ἕνεκεν, τοῦ δὲ παμφορωτάτου κτήματος, ὃ καλεῖται φίλος, ἀργῶς καὶ ἀνειμένως οἱ πλεῖστοι ἐπιμέλονται.  
But still, some people try to cultivate a tree for its fruit, yet most bestow but an idle and listless care on their most fruitful possession, which is called a 'friend'."

678 ἤκουσα δέ ποτε καὶ ἄλλον αὐτοῦ λόγον, ὃς ἐδόκει μοι προτρέπειν τὸν ἀκούοντα ἐξετάζειν ἑαυτὸν ὁπόσου τοῖς φίλοις ἄξιος εἴη.
"Again, I once heard him exhort a listener — for so I interpreted his words — to examine himself and to ask how much he was worth to his friends."

679 ἰδὼν γάρ τινα τῶν συνόντων ἀμελοῦντα φίλου πενίᾳ πιεζομένου, ἤρετο Ἀντισθένη ἐναντίον τοῦ ἀμελοῦντος αὐτοῦ καὶ ἄλλων πολλῶν·
"For he had noticed that one of his companions was neglecting a poverty-stricken friend; so he put a question to Antisthenes in the presence of several others, including the careless friend."

680 ἆρ’ , ἔφη, ὦ Ἀντίσθενες, εἰσί τινες ἀξίαι φίλων, ὥσπερ οἰκετῶν;
"Antisthenes," he said, "have friends like servants their own values?"

681 τῶν γὰρ οἰκετῶν ὁ μέν που δυοῖν μναῖν ἄξιός ἐστιν, ὁ δὲ οὐδ’ ἡμιμναίου, ὁ δὲ πέντε μνῶν, ὁ δὲ καὶ δέκα· Νικίας δὲ ὁ Νικηράτου λέγεται ἐπιστάτην εἰς τ- ἀργύρεια πρίασθαι ταλάντου·
"For one servant, I suppose, may be worth two minas, another less than half a mina, another five minas, another no less than ten. Nicias, son of Niceratus, is said to have given a whole talent for a manager of his silver-mine."

682-683 σκοποῦμαι δὴ τοῦτο, ἔφη, εἰ ἄρα, ὥσπερ τῶν οἰκετῶν, οὕτω καὶ τῶν φίλων εἰσὶν ἀξίαι. "So I am led to inquire whether friends too may not differ in value."

684 Ναὶ μὰ Δί’, ἔφη ὁ Ἀντισθένης· "Oh yes," replied Antisthenes,

685 ἐγὼ γοῦν βουλοίμην ἂν τὸν μέν τινα φίλον μοι εἶναι μᾶλλον ἢ δύο μνᾶς, τὸν δ’ οὐδ’ ἂν ἡμιμναίου προτιμησαίμην, τὸν δὲ καὶ πρὸ δέκα μνῶν ἑλοίμην ἄν, τὸν δὲ πρὸ πάντων χρημάτων, καὶ πόνων πριαίμην ἂν φίλον μοι εἶναι.
"there are men whose friendship I, at any rate, would rather have than two minas: others I should value at less than half a mina: others I would prefer to ten minas: others I would sacrifice any sum and take any trouble to have among my friends."

686 οὐκοῦν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, εἴ γε ταῦτα τοιαῦτά ἐστι, καλῶς ἂν ἔχοι ἐξετάζειν τινὰ ἑαυτόν, πόσου ἄρα τυγχάνει τοῖς φίλοις ἄξιος ὤν, καὶ πειρᾶσθαι ὡς πλείστου ἄξιος εἶναι, ἵνα ἧττον αὐτὸν οἱ φίλοι προδιδῶσιν.
"Then if that is so," said Socrates, "were it not well that one should ask himself how much he is really worth to his friends, and try to make himself as precious as possible, in order that his friends may not be tempted to betray him?"

687 ἐγὼ γάρ τοι, ἔφη, πολλάκις ἀκούων τοῦ μὲν ὅτι προύδωκεν αὐτὸν φίλος ἀνήρ, τοῦ δ’ ὅτι μνᾶν ἀνθ’ ἑαυτοῦ μᾶλλον εἵλετο ἀνήρ, ὃν ᾤετο φίλον εἶναι, τὰ τοιαῦτα πάντα σκοπῶ, μή, ὥσπερ ὅταν τις οἰκέτην πονηρὸν πωλῇ καὶ ἀποδίδοται τοῦ εὑρόντος, οὕτω καὶ τὸν πονηρὸν φίλον, ὅταν ἐξῇ τὸ πλέον τῆς ἀξίας λαβεῖν, ἐπαγωγὸν ᾖ ἀποδίδοσθαι.
"For my part, I often hear complaints of this sort: 'A friend betrayed me,' 'one whom I regarded as my friend gave me up for the sake of a mina.' I think over such matters and reflect that, when a man sells a bad slave he takes anything he can get for him; and perhaps it is tempting to sell a bad friend when there is a chance of getting more than he is worth."

689 ἐδόκει δέ μοι καὶ εἰς τὸ δοκιμάζειν φίλους ὁποίους ἄξιον κτᾶσθαι φρενοῦν τοιάδε λέγων:
"In the following conversation, I thought he gave instruction for testing the qualities that make a man’s friendship worth winning."

690 εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Κριτόβουλε, εἰ δεοίμεθα φίλου ἀγαθοῦ, πῶς ἂν ἐπιχειροίημεν σκοπεῖν;
"Tell me, Critobulus," he said, "if we wanted a good friend, how should we start on the quest?"

691 ἆρα πρῶτον μὲν ζητητέον, ὅστις ἄρχει γαστρός τε καὶ φιλοποσίας καὶ λαγνείας καὶ ὕπνου καὶ ἀργίας;
"Should we seek first for one who is no slave to eating and drinking, lust, sleep, idleness?"

692 ὁ γὰρ ὑπὸ τούτων κρατούμενος οὔτ’ αὐτὸς ἑαυτῷ δύναιτ’ ἂν οὔτε φίλῳ τὰ δέοντα πράττειν.
"For the thrall of these masters cannot do his duty by himself or his friend."

693 μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτα, ἔφη.
"No, of course not," he said.

694 οὐκοῦν τοῦ μὲν ὑπὸ τούτων ἀρχομένου ἀφεκτέον δοκεῖ σοι εἶναι;
"Then you think we should avoid one who is subject to them?"

695 πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.
"I do, certainly," he said.

696-697 τί γάρ; ἔφη, ὅστις δαπανηρὸς ὢν μὴ αὐτάρκης ἐστίν, ἀλλ’ ἀεὶ τῶν πλησίον δεῖται, καὶ λαμβάνων μὲν μὴ δύναται ἀποδιδόναι, μὴ λαμβάνων δὲ τὸν μὴ διδόντα μισεῖ, οὐ δοκεῖ σοι καὶ οὗτος χαλεπὸς φίλος εἶναι;
"Now what about the spendthrift who is never satisfied, who is always appealing to his neighbours for help, if he receives something, makes no return, if he receives nothing, resents it? Don’t you think he too is a troublesome friend?"

698 πάνυ γ’, ἔφη.
"Certainly," he said.

699 οὐκοῦν ἀφεκτέον καὶ τούτου;
"Then we must avoid him too?"

700 ἀφεκτέον μέντοι, ἔφη.
"We must indeed," he said.

701 τί γάρ;
What then?


702 ὅστις χρηματίζεσθαι μὲν δύναται, πολλῶν δὲ χρημάτων ἐπιθυμεῖ, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο δυσσύμβολός ἐστι, καὶ λαμβάνων μὲν ἥδεται, ἀποδιδόναι δὲ μὴ βούλεται;
"Again, what about the skilful man of business who is eager to make money, and consequently drives a hard bargain, who likes to receive but is disinclined to repay?"


703 ἐμοὶ μὲν δοκεῖ, ἔφη, οὗτος ἔτι πονηρότερος ἐκείνου εἶναι.
"So far as I see, he is even worse than the last."

704 τί δ’;
What then?


705 ὅστις διὰ τὸν ἔρωτα τοῦ χρηματίζεσθαι μηδὲ πρὸς ἓν ἄλλο σχολὴν ποιεῖται ἢ ὁπόθεν αὐτός τι κερδανεῖ;
"And what of the man who is such a keen man of business that he has no leisure for anything but the selfish pursuit of gain?"

706 ἀφεκτέον καὶ τούτου, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ;
"We must avoid him too, I think. 


707 ἀνωφελὴς γὰρ ἂν εἴη τῷ χρωμένῳ.
There is no profit in knowing him."



708 τί δέ;
What then?


709 ὅστις στασιώδης τέ ἐστι καὶ θέλων πολλοὺς τοῖς φίλοις ἐχθροὺς παρέχειν;
"And what of the quarrelsome person who is willing to provide his friends with plenty of enemies?"


710 φευκτέον νὴ Δία καὶ τοῦτον.
"We must shun him too, of course."



711 εἰ δέ τις τούτων μὲν τῶν κακῶν μηδὲν ἔχοι, εὖ δὲ πάσχων ἀνέχεται, μηδὲν φροντίζων τοῦ ἀντευεργετεῖν;
"Suppose that a man is free from all these faults, but stoops to receive kindness with no thought of returning it?"


712 ἀνωφελὴς ἂν εἴη καὶ οὗτος.
"There is no profit in him either."



713 ἀλλὰ ποῖον, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἐπιχειρήσομεν φίλον ποιεῖσθαι;
"But what are the qualities for which we shall try to win a man’s friendship, Socrates?"

714	οἶμαι μέν , ὅστις τ- ἐναντία τούτων ἐγκρατὴς μέν ἐστι τῶν διὰ τοῦ σώματος ἡδονῶν , εὔοικος δὲ καὶ εὐσύμβολος ὢν τυγχάνει καὶ φιλόνικος πρὸς τὸ μὴ ἐλλείπεσθαι εὖ ποιῶν τοὺς εὐεργετοῦντας αὐτόν , ὥστε λυσιτελεῖν τοῖς χρωμένοις .
"The opposite of these, I suppose. <said direct="true" rend="merge">We shall look for one who controls his indulgence in the pleasures of the body, who is truly hospitable and fair in his dealings and eager to do as much for his benefactors as he receives from them, so that he is worth knowing."

715	πῶς οὖν ἂν ταῦτα δοκιμάσαιμεν , ὦ Σώκρατες , πρὸ τοῦ χρῆσθαι ;
Then how can we test these qualities, Socrates, before intimacy begins?

716 τοὺς μὲν ἀνδριαντοποιούς, ἔφη, δοκιμάζομεν οὐ τοῖς λόγοις αὐτῶν τεκμαιρόμενοι, ἀλλ’ ὃν ἂν ὁρῶμεν τοὺς πρόσθεν ἀνδριάντας καλῶς εἰργασμένον, τούτῳ πιστεύομεν καὶ τοὺς λοιποὺς εὖ ποιήσειν.
"What test do we apply to a sculptor? We don’t judge by what he says, but we look at his statues, and if we see that the works he has already produced are beautiful, we feel confident that his future works will be as good."

717 καὶ ἄνδρα δὴ λέγεις, ἔφη, ὃς ἂν τοὺς φίλους τοὺς πρόσθεν εὖ ποιῶν φαίνηται, δῆλον εἶναι καὶ τοὺς ὕστερον εὐεργετήσοντα;
"You mean that anyone whose good works wrought upon his old friends are manifest will clearly prove a benefactor to new friends also?"

718 καὶ γὰρ ἵπποις, ἔφη, ὃν ἂν ὁρῶ τοῖς πρόσθεν καλῶς χρώμενον, τοῦτον κἂν ἄλλοις οἶμαι καλῶς χρῆσθαι.
"Yes; for when I find that an owner of horses has been in the habit of treating his beasts well I think that he will treat others equally well."

719 εἶεν, ἔφη;
"Granted!" he said. 



720 ὃς δ’ ἂν ἡμῖν ἄξιος φιλίας δοκῇ εἶναι, πῶς χρὴ φίλον τοῦτον ποιεῖσθαι;
"but when we have found a man who seems worthy of our friendship, how are we to set about making him our friend?"

721 πρῶτον μέν, ἔφη, τὰ παρὰ τῶν θεῶν ἐπισκεπτέον, εἰ συμβουλεύουσιν αὐτὸν φίλον ποιεῖσθαι.
"First we should seek guidance from the gods, whether they counsel us to make a friend of him."

722 τί οὖν;
"And next? 

723 ἔφη, ὃν ἂν ἡμῖν τε δοκῇ καὶ οἱ θεοὶ μὴ ἐναντιῶνται, ἔχεις εἰπεῖν ὅπως οὗτος θηρατέος;
Supposing that we have chosen and the gods approve him, can you say how is he to be hunted?"

724 μὰ Δί’, ἔφη, οὐ κατὰ πόδας, ὥσπερ ὁ λαγῶς, οὐδ’ ἀπάτῃ, ὥσπερ αἱ ὄρνιθες, οὐδὲ βίᾳ, ὥσπερ οἱ ἐχθροί;
"Surely not like a hare by swift pursuit, nor like birds by cunning, nor like enemies by force."

725 ἄκοντα γὰρ φίλον ἑλεῖν ἐργῶδες;
"It is no light task to capture a friend against his will."

726 χαλεπὸν δὲ καὶ δήσαντα κατέχειν, ὥσπερ δοῦλον;
"And hard to keep him a prisoner like a slave."

727 ἐχθροὶ γὰρ μᾶλλον ἢ φίλοι γίγνονται οἱ ταῦτα πάσχοντες;
"Hatred, rather than friendship, comes of that treatment."

728 φίλοι δὲ πῶς;
"But how does friendship come?"

729 ἔφη;
he said.

730 εἶναι μέν τινάς φασιν ἐπῳδάς, ἃς οἱ ἐπιστάμενοι ἐπᾴδοντες οἷς ἂν βούλωνται φίλους αὐτοὺς ποιοῦνται;
"There are spells, they say, wherewith those who know charm whom they will and make friends of them."

731 εἶναι δὲ καὶ φίλτρα, οἷς οἱ ἐπιστάμενοι πρὸς οὓς ἂν βούλωνται χρώμενοι φιλοῦνται ὑπ’ αὐτῶν;
"And drugs which those who know give to whom they choose and win their love."

732 πόθεν οὖν, ἔφη, ταῦτα μάθοιμεν ἄν;
"How then can we learn them?"

733 ἃ μὲν αἱ Σειρῆνες ἐπῇδον τῷ Ὀδυσσεῖ ἤκουσας Ὁμήρου, ὧν ἐστιν ἀρχὴ τοιάδε τις·
"You have heard from Homer the spell that the Sirens put on Odysseus. It begins like this:"

734 δεῦρ’ ἄγε δή, πολύαιν’ Ὀδυσεῦ, μέγα κῦδος Ἀχαιῶν.
'Hither, come hither, renowned Odysseus, great glory of the Achaeans.'

735 ταύτην οὖν, ἔφη, τὴν ἐπῳδήν, ὦ Σώκρατες, καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις αἱ Σειρῆνες ἐπᾴδουσαι κατεῖχον, ὥστε μὴ ἀπιέναι ἀπ’ αὐτῶν τοὺς ἐπᾳσθέντας;
"Then did the Sirens chant in this strain for other folk too, Socrates, so as to keep those who were under the spell from leaving them?"

736 οὐκ ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἐπ’ ἀρετῇ φιλοτιμουμένοις οὕτως ἐπῇδον.
"No, only for those that yearned for the fame that virtue gives."

737 σχεδόν τι λέγεις τοιαῦτα χρῆναι ἑκάστῳ ἐπᾴδειν, οἷα μὴ νομιεῖ ἀκούων τὸν ἐπαινοῦντα καταγελῶντα λέγειν;
"You mean, I take it, that the spell must be fitted to the listener, so that he may not take the praise for mockery."

738 οὕτω μὲν γὰρ ἐχθίων τ’ ἂν εἴη καὶ ἀπελαύνοι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἀφ’ ἑαυτοῦ, εἰ τὸν εἰδότα ὅτι μικρός τε καὶ αἰσχρὸς καὶ ἀσθενής ἐστιν ἐπαινοίη λέγων ὅτι καλός τε καὶ μέγας καὶ ἰσχυρός ἐστιν.
"Yes; for to praise one for his beauty, his stature and his strength who is conscious that he is short, ugly and puny, is the way to repel him and make him dislike you more."

739 ἄλλας δέ τινας οἶσθα ἐπῳδάς;
"Do you know any other spells?"

740 οὐκ ἀλλ’ ἤκουσα μὲν ὅτι Περικλῆς πολλὰς ἐπίσταιτο, ἃς ἐπᾴδων τῇ πόλει ἐποίει αὐτὴν φιλεῖν αὑτόν.
"No, but I have heard that Pericles knew many and put them on the city, and so made her love him."

741 Θεμιστοκλῆς δὲ πῶς ἐποίησε τὴν πόλιν φιλεῖν αὑτόν;
"And how did Themistocles make the city love him?"

742 μὰ Δί’ οὐκ ἐπᾴδων, ἀλλὰ περιάψας τι ἀγαθὸν αὐτῇ.
"Not by spells: no, no; but by hanging some good amulet about her."

743 δοκεῖς μοι λέγειν, ὦ Σώκρατες, ὡς, εἰ μέλλοιμεν ἀγαθόν τινα κτήσασθαι φίλον, αὐτοὺς ἡμᾶς ἀγαθοὺς δεῖ γενέσθαι λέγειν τε καὶ πράττειν.
"I think you mean, Socrates, that if we are to win a good man’s friendship, we ourselves must be good in word and deed alike."

744 σὺ δ’ ᾤου, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, οἷόν τ’ εἶναι καὶ πονηρὸν ὄντα χρηστοὺς φίλους κτήσασθαι;
"But you imagined that a bad man could win the friendship of honest men?"

745 ἑώρων γάρ , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος , ῥήτοράς τε φαύλους ἀγαθοῖς δημηγόροις φίλους ὄντας , καὶ στρατηγεῖν οὐχ ἱκανοὺς πάνυ στρατηγικοῖς ἀνδράσιν ἑταίρους .
"I did," answered Critobulus, "for I saw that poor orators have good speakers among their friends, and some who are incapable of commanding an army are intimate with great generals."

746 ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , καί , περὶ οὗ διαλεγόμεθα , οἶσθά τινας οἳ ἀνωφελεῖς ὄντες ὠφελίμους δύνανται φίλους ποιεῖσθαι ;
"Coming then to the point under discussion, do you know cases of useless persons making useful friends?" asked Socrates.

747 μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτ’ , ἔφη ·
"Assuredly not," he replied;

748 ἀλλ’ εἰ ἀδύνατόν ἐστι πονηρὸν ὄντα καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς φίλους κτήσασθαι , ἐκεῖνο ἤδη μέλει μοι , εἰ ἔστιν αὐτὸν καλὸν κ- ἀγαθὸν γενόμενον ἐξ ἑτοίμου τοῖς καλοῖς κ- ἀγαθοῖς φίλον εἶναι .
"but if it is impossible that the bad should gain the friendship of gentlemen, then I am anxious to know whether it is quite easy for a gentleman as a matter of course to be the friend of gentlemen?" he added.

749 ὃ ταράττει σε , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , ὅτι πολλάκις ἄνδρας καὶ τὰ καλὰ πράττοντας καὶ τῶν αἰσχρῶν ἀπεχομένους ὁρᾷς ἀντὶ τοῦ φίλους εἶναι στασιάζοντας ἀλλήλοις καὶ χαλεπώτερον χρωμένους τῶν μηδενὸς ἀξίων ἀνθρώπων .
"Your trouble is, Critobulus, that you often find men who do good and shun evil not on friendly terms, but apt to quarrel and treat one another more harshly than worthless fellows," Socrates observed.

750 καὶ οὐ μόνον γ’ , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος , οἱ ἰδιῶται τοῦτο ποιοῦσιν , ἀλλὰ καὶ πόλεις αἱ τῶν τε καλῶν μάλιστα ἐπιμελόμεναι καὶ τὰ αἰσχρὰ ἥκιστα προσιέμεναι πολλάκις πολεμικῶς ἔχουσι πρὸς ἀλλήλας .
"Yes," said Critobulus, "and such conduct is not confined to individuals, but even the cities that care most for the right and have least liking for the wrong are often at enmity."

751 ἃ λογιζόμενος πάνυ ἀθύμως ἔχω πρὸς τὴν τῶν φίλων κτῆσιν ·
"These thoughts make me despair about the acquisition of friends."

752 οὔτε γὰρ τοὺς πονηροὺς ὁρῶ φίλους ἀλλήλοις δυναμένους εἶναι ·
"For I see on the one hand that rogues cannot be friends with one another —"

753 πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἢ ἀχάριστοι ἢ ἀμελεῖς ἢ πλεονέκται ἢ ἄπιστοι ἢ ἀκρατεῖς ἄνθρωποι δύναιντο φίλοι γενέσθαι ;
"for how could the ungrateful, the careless, the selfish, the faithless, the incontinent, form friendships?"

754 οἱ μὲν οὖν πονηροὶ πάντως ἔμοιγε δοκοῦσιν ἀλλήλοις ἐχθροὶ μᾶλλον ἢ φίλοι πεφυκέναι .
"I feel sure, then, that rogues are by their nature enemies rather than friends."

755 ἀλλὰ μήν , ὥσπερ σὺ λέγεις , οὐδ’ ἂν τοῖς χρηστοῖς οἱ πονηροί ποτε συναρμόσειαν εἰς φιλίαν ·
"But then, as you point out, neither can rogues ever join in friendship with honest men,"

756 πῶς γὰρ οἱ τὰ πονηρὰ ποιοῦντες τοῖς τὰ τοιαῦτα μισοῦσι φίλοι γένοιντ’ ἄν ;
"for how can wrongdoers become friendly with those who hate their conduct?"

757 εἰ δὲ δὴ καὶ οἱ ἀρετὴν ἀσκοῦντες στασιάζουσί τε περὶ τοῦ πρωτεύειν ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι καὶ φθονοῦντες ἑαυτοῖς μισοῦσιν ἀλλήλους , τίνες ἔτι φίλοι ἔσονται καὶ ἐν τίσιν ἀνθρώποις εὔνοια καὶ πίστις ἔσται ;
"And if we must add that the votaries of virtue strive with one another for headship in cities, and envy and hate one another, who then will be friends and where shall loyalty and faithfulness be found?"

758 ἀλλ’ ἔχει μέν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ποικίλως πως ταῦτα , ὦ Κριτόβουλε .
"Ah, Critobulus, but there is a strange complication in these matters."

759 φύσει γὰρ ἔχουσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι τὰ μὲν φιλικά ·
"Some elements in man’s nature make for friendship:"

760 δέονταί τε γὰρ ἀλλήλων καὶ ἐλεοῦσι καὶ συνεργοῦντες ὠφελοῦσι καὶ τοῦτο συνιέντες χάριν ἔχουσιν ἀλλήλοις ·
"men need one another, feel pity, work together for their common good, and, conscious of the facts, are grateful to one another."

761 τὰ δὲ πολεμικά ·
"But there are hostile elements in men."

762 τά τε γὰρ αὐτὰ καλὰ καὶ ἡδέα νομίζοντες ὑπὲρ τούτων μάχονται καὶ διχογνωμονοῦντες ἐναντιοῦνται ·
"For, holding the same things to be honourable and pleasant, they fight for them, fall out and take sides."

763 πολεμικὸν δὲ καὶ ἔρις καὶ ὀργή ·
"Strife and anger lead to hostility,"

764 καὶ δυσμενὲς μὲν ὁ τοῦ πλεονεκτεῖν ἔρως , μισητὸν δὲ ὁ φθόνος .
"covetousness to enmity, jealousy to hatred."

765 ἀλλ’ ὅμως διὰ τούτων πάντων ἡ φιλία διαδυομένη συνάπτει τοὺς καλούς τε κ- ἀγαθούς .
"Nevertheless through all these barriers friendship slips, and unites the gentle natures."

766 διὰ γὰρ τὴν ἀρετὴν αἱροῦνται μὲν ἄνευ πόνου τὰ μέτρια κεκτῆσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ διὰ πολέμου πάντων κυριεύειν ,
"For thanks to their virtue these prize the untroubled security of moderate possessions above sovereignty won by war;"

καὶ δύνανται πεινῶντες καὶ διψῶντες ἀλύπως σίτου καὶ ποτοῦ κοινωνεῖν καὶ τοῖς τῶν ὡραίων ἀφροδισίοις ἡδόμενοι καρτερεῖν , ὥστε μὴ λυπεῖν οὓς μὴ προσήκει ·
"despite hunger and thirst, they can share their food and drink without a pang; and although they delight in the charms of beauty they can resist the lure and avoid offending those whom they should respect;"

767 δύνανται δὲ καὶ χρημάτων οὐ μόνον τοῦ πλεονεκτεῖν ἀπεχόμενοι νομίμως κοινωνεῖν , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπαρκεῖν ἀλλήλοις ·
"they can not only share wealth lawfully and keep from covetousness, but also supply one another’s wants;"

768 δύνανται δὲ καὶ τὴν ἔριν οὐ μόνον ἀλύπως , ἀλλὰ καὶ συμφερόντως ἀλλήλοις διατίθεσθαι καὶ τὴν ὀργὴν κωλύειν εἰς τὸ μεταμελησόμενον προϊέναι ·
"they can compose strife not only without pain, but with advantage to one another, and prevent anger from pursuing its way towards remorse:"

769 τὸν δὲ φθόνον παντάπασιν ἀφαιροῦσι , τὰ μὲν ἑαυτῶν ἀγαθὰ τοῖς φίλοις οἰκεῖα παρέχοντες , τὰ δὲ τῶν φίλων ἑαυτῶν νομίζοντες .
"but jealousy they take away utterly, regarding their own good things as belonging to their friends, and thinking their friend’s good things to be their own."

770 πῶς οὖν οὐκ εἰκὸς τοὺς καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς καὶ τῶν π

ολιτικῶν τιμῶν μὴ μόνον ἀβλαβεῖς , ἀλλὰ καὶ ὠφελίμους ἀλλήλοις κοινωνοὺς εἶναι ;
"Surely, then, it is likely that true gentlemen will share public honours too not only without harm to one another, but to their common benefit?"

771 οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἐπιθυμοῦντες ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι τιμᾶσθαί τε καὶ ἄρχειν , ἵνα ἐξουσίαν ἔχωσι χρήματά τε κλέπτειν καὶ ἀνθρώπους βιάζεσθαι καὶ ἡδυπαθεῖν , ἄδικοί τε καὶ πονηροὶ ἂν εἶεν καὶ ἀδύνατοι ἄλλῳ συναρμόσαι .
"For those who desire to win honour and to bear rule in their cities that they may have power to embezzle, to treat others with violence, to live in luxury, are bound to be unjust, unscrupulous, incapable of unity."

772 εἰ δέ τις ἐν πόλει τιμᾶσθαι βουλόμενος , ὅπως αὐτός τε μὴ ἀδικῆται καὶ τοῖς φίλοις τὰ δίκαια βοηθεῖν δύνηται , καὶ ἄρξας ἀγαθόν τι ποιεῖν τὴν πατρίδα πειρᾶται ,
"But if a man seeks to be honoured in a state that he may not be the victim of injustice himself and may help his friends in a just cause, and when he takes office may try to do some good to his country,"

διὰ τί ὁ τοιοῦτος ἄλλῳ τοιούτῳ οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο συναρμόσαι ;
"why should he be incapable of union with one like himself?"

773 πότερον τοὺς φίλους ὠφελεῖν μετὰ τῶν καλῶν κ- ἀγαθῶν ἧττον δυνήσεται ;
"Will his connexion with other gentlemen render him less capable of serving his friends?"

774 ἢ τὴν πόλιν εὐεργετεῖν ἀδυνατώτερος ἔσται καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς ἔχων συνεργούς ;
"Will he be less able to benefit his city with the help of other gentlemen?"

775 ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν τοῖς γυμνικοῖς ἀγῶσι δῆλόν ἐστιν , ὅτι , εἰ ἐξῆν τοῖς κρατίστοις συνθεμένους ἐπὶ τοὺς χείρους ἰέναι , πάντας ἂν τοὺς ἀγῶνας οὗτοι ἐνίκων καὶ πάντα τὰ ἆθλα οὗτοι ἐλάμβανον .
"Even in the public games it is clear that, if the strongest competitors were allowed to join forces against the weaker, they would win all the events, they would carry off all the prizes."

776 ἐπεὶ οὖν ἐκεῖ μὲν οὐκ ἐῶσι τοῦτο ποιεῖν , ἐν δὲ τοῖς πολιτικοῖς , ἐν οἷς οἱ καλοὶ κ- ἀγαθοὶ κρατιστεύουσιν , οὐδεὶς κωλύει μεθ’ οὗ ἄν τις βούληται τὴν πόλιν εὐεργετεῖν ,
"True, that is not permitted in the games; but in politics, where the gentlemen are the strongest, nobody prevents anyone from forming any combination he may choose for the benefit of the state;"

πῶς οὐ λυσιτελεῖ τοὺς βελτίστους φίλους κτησ

άμενον πολιτεύεσθαι , τούτοις κοινωνοῖς καὶ συνεργοῖς τῶν πράξεων μᾶλλον ἢ ἀνταγωνισταῖς χρώμενον ;
"surely, then, in public life it is a gain to make friends with the best, and to see in them partners and fellow-workers in a common cause, and not rivals."

777 ἀλλὰ μὴν κ- ἐκεῖνο δῆλον , ὅτι κἂν πολεμῇ τίς τινι , συμμάχων δεήσεται , καὶ τούτων πλειόνων , ἐὰν καλοῖς κ- ἀγαθοῖς ἀντιτάττηται .
"But, again, it is equally clear that anyone who goes to war will need allies, and more of them if he is to fight an army of gentlemen."

778 καὶ μὴν οἱ συμμαχεῖν ἐθέλοντες εὖ ποιητέοι , ἵνα θέλωσι προθυμεῖσθαι ·
"Moreover, those who are willing to fight at your side must be well treated that they may be willing to exert themselves;"

779 πολὺ δὲ κρεῖττον τοὺς βελτίστους ἐλάττονας εὖ ποιεῖν ἢ τοὺς χείρονας πλείονας ὄντας ·
"and it is a far sounder plan to show kindness to the best, who are fewer in number, than to the worst, who are the greater company;"

780 οἱ γὰρ πονηροὶ πολὺ πλειόνων εὐεργεσιῶν ἢ οἱ χρηστοὶ δέονται .
"for the bad want many more kindnesses than the good."

781 ἀλλὰ θαρρῶν , ἔφη , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , πειρῶ ἀγαθὸς γίγνεσθαι , καὶ τοιοῦτος γενόμενος θηρᾶν ἐπιχείρει τοὺς καλούς τε κ- ἀγαθούς .
"Courage, Critobulus; try to be good, and when you have achieved that, set about catching your gentleman."

782 ἴσως δ’ ἄν τί σοι κ- ἐγὼ συλλαβεῖν εἰς τὴν τῶν καλῶν τε κ- ἀγαθῶν θήραν ἔχοιμι διὰ τὸ ἐρωτικὸς εἶναι ·
"Maybe, I myself, as an adept in love, can lend you a hand in the pursuit of gentlemen."

783 δεινῶς γάρ , ὧν ἂν ἐπιθυμήσω ἀνθρώπων , ὅλος ὥρμημαι ἐπὶ τὸ φιλῶν τε αὐτοὺς ἀντιφιλεῖσθαι ὑπ’ αὐτῶν καὶ ποθῶν ἀντιποθεῖσθαι , καὶ ἐπιθυμῶν συνεῖναι καὶ ἀντεπιθυμεῖσθαι τῆς συνουσίας .
"For when I want to catch anyone it’s surprising how I strain every nerve to have my love returned, my longing reciprocated by him, in my eagerness that he shall want me as much as I want him."

784 ὁρῶ δὲ καὶ σοὶ τούτων δεῆσον , ὅταν ἐπιθυμήσῃς φιλίαν πρός τινας ποιεῖσθαι ·
"I see that you too will feel this need when you want to form a friendship."

785 μὴ οὖν ἀποκρύπτου με οἷς ἂν βούλῃ φίλος γενέσθαι ·
"So do not hide from me the names of those whom you wish to make your friends;"

786 διὰ γὰρ τὸ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τοῦ ἀρέσαι τῷ ἀρέσκοντί μοι οὐκ ἀπείρως οἶμαι ἔχειν πρὸς θήραν ἀνθρώπων .
"for I am careful to please him who pleases me, and so, I think, I am not without experience in the pursuit of men."

787 καὶ ὁ Κριτόβουλος ἔφη ·
"And Critobulus said:"

788 καὶ μήν , ὦ Σώκρατες , τούτων ἐγὼ τῶν μαθημάτων πάλαι ἐπιθυμῶ ἄλλως τε καὶ εἰ ἐξαρκέσει μοι ἡ αὐ

τὴ ἐπιστήμη ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς τὰς ψυχὰς καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς καλοὺς τὰ σώματα .
"Well, Socrates," said Critobulus in reply, "these are the lessons I have long wished to learn, especially if the same skill will serve to win a good soul and a fair face."

789 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·
"Ah no, Critobulus," said Socrates,

790 ἀλλ’ , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν τῇ ἐμῇ ἐπιστήμῃ τὸ τὰς χεῖρας προσφέροντα ποιεῖν ὑπομένειν τοὺς καλούς .
"it belongs not to my skill to lay hands on the fair and force them to submit."

791 πέπεισμαι δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τῆς Σκύλλης διὰ τοῦτο φεύγειν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους , ὅτι τὰς χεῖρας αὐτοῖς προσέφερε ·
"I am convinced that the reason why men fled from Scylla was that she laid hands on them;"

792 τὰς δέ γε Σειρῆνας , ὅτι τὰς χεῖρας οὐδενὶ προσέφερον , ἀλλὰ πᾶσι πόρρωθεν ἐπῇδον , πάντας φασὶν ὑπομένειν καὶ ἀκούοντας αὐτῶν κηλεῖσθαι .
"but the Sirens laid hands on no man; from far away they sang to all, and therefore, we are told, all submitted, and hearing were enchanted."

793 καὶ ὁ Κριτόβουλος ἔφη ·
And Critobulus said:

794 ὡς οὐ προσοίσοντος τὰς χεῖρας , εἴ τι ἔχεις ἀγαθὸν εἰς φίλων κτῆσιν , δίδασκε .
"I am not going to put a hand on anyone, so teach me any good plan you know for making friends."

795 οὐδὲ τὸ στόμα οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , πρὸς τὸ στόμα προσοίσεις ;
"Then won’t you put lip to lip either?" asked Socrates.

796 θάρρει , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος ·
"Courage!" answered Critobulus,

797 οὐδὲ γὰρ τὸ στόμα πρὸς τὸ στόμα προσοίσω οὐδενί , ἐὰν μὴ καλὸς ᾖ .
"I won’t touch a lip with mine either — unless the owner is fair!"

798 εὐθύς , ἔφη , σύγε , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , τ- ἐναντίον τοῦ συμφέροντος εἴρηκας .
"That’s an unfortunate beginning for you, Critobulus! The fair won’t submit to such conduct;"

799 οἱ μὲν γὰρ καλοὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα οὐχ ὑπομέν

ουσιν ·
"but the ugly like it, supposing that they are called fair for the beauty of their souls."

800 οἱ δὲ αἰσχροὶ καὶ ἡδέως προσίενται , νομίζοντες διὰ τὴν ψυχὴν καλοὶ καλεῖσθαι .
Critobulus replied:

801 καὶ ὁ Κριτόβουλος ἔφη ·
"A kiss for the fair," exclaimed Critobulus,

802 ὡς τοὺς μὲν καλοὺς φιλήσοντός μου , τοὺς δ’ ἀγαθοὺς καταφιλήσοντος , θαρρῶν δίδασκε τῶν φίλων τὰ θηρατικά .
"and a thousand kisses for the good! That shall be my motto, so take courage, and teach me the art of catching friends."

803 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·
"Well then, Critobulus," said Socrates,

804 ὅταν οὖν , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , φίλος τινὶ βούλῃ γενέσθαι , ἐάσεις με κατειπεῖν σου πρὸς αὐτὸν ὅτι ἄγασαί τε αὐτοῦ καὶ ἐπιθυμεῖς φίλος αὐτοῦ εἶναι ;
"when you want to make a new friend, will you let me warn him that you admire him and want his friendship?"

805 κατηγόρει , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος ·
"Warn him by all means," said Critobulus,

806 οὐδένα γὰρ οἶδα μισοῦντα τοὺς ἐπαινοῦντας .
"no one hates those who praise him, so far as I know."

807 ἐὰν δέ σου προσκατηγορήσω , ἔφη , ὅτι διὰ τὸ ἄγασθαι αὐτοῦ καὶ εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχεις πρὸς αὐτόν , ἆρα μὴ διαβάλλεσθαι δόξεις ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ ;
"Suppose I go on to warn him that your admiration makes you well disposed towards him, you won’t think I am slandering you, will you?" Socrates asked.

808 ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτῷ μοι , ἔφη , ἐγγίγνεται εὔνοια πρὸς οὓς ἂν ὑπολάβω εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχειν πρὸς ἐμέ .
"Nay; when I guess that anyone feels well disposed towards me, a like goodwill towards him is begotten in me," Critobulus replied.

809 ταῦτα μὲν δή , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ἐξέσται μοι λέγειν περὶ σοῦ πρὸς οὓς ἂν βούλῃ φίλους ποιήσασθαι ·
"Then you will permit me to say this about you to those whose friendship you desire," Socrates said.

810 ἐὰν δέ μοι ἔτι ἐξουσίαν δῷς λέγειν περὶ σοῦ ὅτι ἐπιμελής τε τῶν φίλων εἶ καὶ οὐδενὶ οὕτω χαίρεις ὡς φίλοις ἀγαθοῖς , καὶ ἐπί τε τοῖς καλοῖς ἔργοις τῶν φίλων ἀγάλλῃ οὐχ ἧττον ἢ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς τῶν φίλων χαίρεις οὐδὲν ἧττον ἢ ἐπὶ τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ , ὅπως τε ταῦτα γίγνηται τοῖς φίλοις οὐκ ἀποκάμνεις μηχανώμενος , καὶ ὅτι ἔγνωκας ἀνδρὸς ἀρετὴν εἶναι νικᾶν τοὺς μὲν φίλους εὖ ποιοῦντα , τοὺς δ’ ἐχθροὺς κακῶς , πάνυ ἂν οἶμαί σοι ἐπιτήδειον εἶναί με σύνθηρον τῶν ἀγαθῶν φίλων .
"Now if you will give me permission to tell them besides that you are devoted to your friends and nothing gives you so much pleasure as good friends; that you take as much pride in your friends’ fair achievements as in your own, and as much pleasure in your friends’ good as in your own, and never weary of contriving it for your friend’s; and you have made up your mind that a man’s virtue consists in outdoing his friends in kindness and his enemies in mischief; then I think you will find me a useful companion in the quest of good friends," Socrates continued.

811 τί οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος , ἐμοὶ τοῦτο λέγεις , ὥσπερ οὐκ ἐπὶ σοὶ ὂν ὅ τι ἂν βούλῃ περὶ ἐμοῦ λέγειν ;
"Now why do you say this to me? as if you were not free to say what you choose about me," Critobulus asked.

812 μὰ Δί’ οὐχ ὥς ποτε ἐγὼ Ἀσπασίας ἤκουσα ·
"Not so indeed: I can quote Aspasia against you," Socrates replied.

813 ἔφη γὰρ τὰς ἀγαθὰς προμνηστρίδας μετὰ μὲν ἀληθείας τ- ἀγαθὰ διαγγελλούσας δεινὰς εἶναι συνάγειν ἀνθρώπους εἰς κηδείαν , ψευδομένας δ’ οὐκ ἐθέλειν ἐπαινεῖν ·
"She once told me that good matchmakers are successful in making marriages only when the good reports they carry to and fro are true; false reports she would not recommend, for the victims of deception hate one another and the matchmaker too."

814 τοὺς γὰρ ἐξαπατηθέντας ἅμα μισεῖν ἀλλήλους τε καὶ τὴν προμνησαμένην .
"I am convinced that this is sound, and so I think it is not open to me to say anything in your praise that I can’t say truthfully."

815 ἃ δὴ καὶ ἐγὼ πεισθεὶς ὀρθῶς ἔχειν ἡγοῦμαι οὐκ ἐξεῖναί μοι περὶ σοῦ λέγειν ἐπαινοῦντι οὐδὲν ὅ τι ἂν μὴ ἀληθεύω .
"It appears, Socrates, that you are the sort of friend to help me if I am in any way qualified to make friends: but if not, you won’t make up a story to help me," said Critobulus.

816 σὺ μὲν ἄρα , ἔφη ὁ Κριτόβουλος , τοιοῦτός μοι φίλος εἶ , ὦ Σώκρατες , οἷος , ἂν μέν τι αὐτὸς ἔχω ἐπιτήδειον εἰς τὸ φίλους κτήσασθαι , συλλαμβάνειν μοι ·
"How do you think I shall help you best, Critobulus, by false praise, or by urging you to try to be a good man?" Socrates asked.

817 εἰ δὲ μή , οὐκ ἂν ἐθέλοις πλάσας τι εἰπεῖν ἐπὶ τῇ ἐμῇ ὠφελείᾳ .
"It appears, Socrates, that you are the sort of friend to help me if I am in any way qualified to make friends: but if not, you won’t make up a story to help me."

818 πότερα δ’ ἄν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , δοκῶ σοι μᾶλλον ὠφελεῖν σε τὰ ψευδῆ ἐπαινῶν ἢ πείθων πειρᾶσθαί σε ἀγαθὸν ἄνδρα γενέσθαι ;
"How do you think I shall help you best, Critobulus, by false praise, or by urging you to try to be a good man?"

819 εἰ δὲ μὴ φανερὸν οὕτω σοι , ἐκ τῶνδε σκέψαι ·
"If you don’t yet see clearly, take the following cases as illustrations."

820 εἰ γάρ σε βουλόμενος φίλον ποιῆσαι ναυκλήρῳ ψευδόμενος ἐπαινοίην , φάσκων ἀγαθὸν εἶναι κυβερνήτην , ὁ δέ μοι πεισθεὶς ἐπιτρέψειέ σοι τὴν ναῦν μὴ ἐπισταμένῳ κυβερνᾶν , ἔχεις τινὰ ἐλπίδα μὴ ἂν σαυτόν τε καὶ τὴν ναῦν ἀπολέσαι ;
"Suppose that I wanted to get a shipmaster to make you his friend, and as a recommendation told him that you are a good skipper, which is untrue; and suppose that he believed me and put you in charge of his ship in spite of your not knowing how to steer it: have you any reason to hope that you would not lose the ship and your life as well?"

821 ἢ εἴ σοι πείσαιμι κοινῇ τὴν πόλιν ψευδόμενος , ὡς ἂν στρατηγικῷ τε καὶ δικαστικῷ καὶ πολιτικῷ , ἑαυτὴν ἐπιτρέψαι , τί ἂν οἴει σεαυτὸν καὶ τὴν πόλιν ὑπὸ σοῦ παθεῖν ;
"Or suppose that I falsely represented to the Assembly that you are a born general, jurist and statesman in one, and so persuaded the state to commit her fortunes to you, what do you suppose would happen to the state and to yourself under your guidance?"

822 ἢ εἴ τινας ἰδίᾳ τῶν πολιτῶν πείσαιμι ψευδόμενος , ὡς ὄντι οἰκονομικῷ τε καὶ ἐπιμελεῖ , τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἐπιτρέψαι , ἆρ’ οὐκ ἂν πεῖραν διδοὺς ἅμα τε βλαβερὸς εἴης καὶ καταγέλαστος φαίνοιο ;
"Or again, suppose that I falsely described you to certain citizens in private as a thrifty, careful person, and persuaded them to place their affairs in your hands, wouldn’t you do them harm and look ridiculous when you came to the test?"

823 ἀλλὰ συντομωτάτη τε καὶ ἀσφαλεστάτη καὶ καλλίστη ὁδός , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , ὅ τι ἂν βούλῃ δοκεῖν ἀγαθὸς εἶναι , τοῦτο καὶ γενέσθαι ἀγαθὸν πειρᾶσθαι ·
"Nay, Critobulus, if you want to be thought good at anything, you must try to be so; that is the quickest, the surest, the best way."

824 ὅσαι δ’ ἐν ἀνθρώποις ἀρεταὶ λέγονται , σκοπούμενος εὑρήσεις πάσας μαθήσει τε καὶ μελέτῃ αὐξανομένας .
"You will find on reflection that every kind of virtue named among men is increased by study and practice."

825 ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν , ὦ Κριτόβουλε , οἶμαι δεῖν ἡμᾶς G? ·
"Such is the view I take of our duty, Critobulus."

826 εἰ δὲ σύ πως ἄλλως γιγνώσκεις , δίδασκε .
"If you have anything to say against it, tell me."

827 καὶ ὁ Κριτόβουλος , ἀλλ’ αἰσχυνοίμην ἄν , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἀντιλέγων τούτοις ·
"Why, Socrates," said Critobulus, "I should be ashamed to contradict you, 

828 οὔτε γὰρ καλὰ οὔτε ἀληθῆ λέγοιμ’ ἄν .
for I should be saying what is neither honourable nor true."

829 καὶ μὴν τὰς ἀπορίας γε τῶν φίλων τὰς μὲν δι’ ἄγνοιαν ἐπειρᾶτο γνώμῃ ἀκεῖσθαι , τὰς δὲ δι’ ἔνδειαν διδάσκων κατὰ δύναμιν ἀλλήλοις ἐπαρκεῖν .
To pass to another subject. The distresses of his friends that arose from ignorance he tried to cure by advice, those that were due to want by telling them how to help one another according to their power.

830 ἐρῶ δὲ καὶ ἐν τούτοις ἃ σύνοιδα αὐτῷ .
On this subject too I will state what I know about him.

831 Ἀρίσταρχον γάρ ποτε ὁρῶν σκυθρωπῶς ἔχοντα , ἔοικας , ἔφη , ὦ Ἀρίσταρχε , βαρέως φέρειν τι .
One day, noticing that Aristarchus looked glum, he said: "Aristarchus, you seem to have a burden on your mind."

832 χρὴ δὲ τοῦ βάρους μεταδιδόναι τοῖς φίλοις ·
"You should let your friends share it;"

833 ἴσως γὰρ ἄν τί σε καὶ ἡμεῖς κουφίσαιμεν .
"possibly we may do something to ease you."

834 καὶ ὁ Ἀρίσταρχος , ἀλλὰ μήν , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἐν πολλῇ γέ εἰμι ἀπορίᾳ .
Ah yes, Socrates, replied Aristarchus, "I am in great distress."

835 ἐπεὶ γὰρ ἐστασίασεν ἡ πόλις , πολλῶν φυγόντων εἰς τὸν Πειραιᾶ , συνεληλύθασιν ὡς ἐμὲ καταλελειμμέναι ἀδελφαί τε καὶ ἀδελφιδαῖ καὶ ἀνεψιαὶ τοσαῦται ὥστ’ εἶναι ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ τέτταρας καὶ δέκα τοὺς ἐλευθέρους .
"Since the revolution there has been an exodus to the Piraeus, and a crowd of my women-folk, being left behind, are come to me, — sisters, nieces and cousins, — so that we are fourteen in the house without counting the slaves."

836 λαμβάνομεν δὲ οὔτε ἐκ τῆς γῆς οὐδέν ·
"We get nothing from our land,"

837 οἱ γὰρ ἐναντίοι κρατοῦσιν αὐτῆς ·
"because our enemies have seized it,"

838 οὔτ’ ἀπὸ τῶν οἰκιῶν ·
"and nothing from our house property,"

839 ὀλιγανθρωπία γὰρ ἐν τῷ ἄστει γέγονε .
"now there are so few residents in the city."

840 τὰ ἔπιπλα δὲ οὐδεὶς ὠνεῖται ·
"Portable property finds no buyers,"

841 οὐδὲ δανείσασθαι οὐδαμόθεν ἔστιν ἀργύριον , ἀλλὰ πρότερον ἄν τίς μοι δοκεῖ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ζητῶν εὑρεῖν ἢ δανειζόμενος λαβεῖν .
"and it’s quite impossible to borrow money anywhere: I really think a search in the street would have better result than an application for a loan."

842 χαλεπὸν μὲν οὖν ἐστιν , ὦ Σώκρατες , τοὺς οἰκείους περιορᾶν ἀπολλυμένους , ἀδύνατον δὲ τοσούτους τρέφειν ἐν τοιούτοις πράγμασιν .
"It’s hard, Socrates, to let one’s people die, but impossible to keep so many in times like these."

843 ἀκούσας οὖν ταῦτα ὁ Σωκράτης , τί ποτέ ἐστιν , ἔφη , ὅτι Κεράμων μὲν πολλοὺς τρέφων οὐ μόνον ἑαυτῷ τε καὶ τούτοις τὰ ἐπιτήδεια δύναται παρέχειν , ἀλλὰ καὶ περιποιεῖται τοσαῦτα ὥστε καὶ πλουτεῖν , σὺ δὲ πολλοὺς τρέφων δέδοικας μὴ δι’ ἔνδειαν τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ἅπαντες ἀπόλησθε ;
"How is it that with so many mouths to feed Ceramon not only contrives to provide for the needs of himself and his family, but actually saves enough to make him a rich man, whereas you, with so many mouths to feed, fear you will all be starved to death?"

844 ὅτι νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ὁ μὲν δούλους τρέφει , ἐγὼ δ’ ἐλευθέρους .
"The explanation, of course, is this: my dependants are gentlefolk, his are slaves."

845 καὶ πότερον , ἔφη , τοὺς παρὰ σοὶ ἐλευθέρους οἴει βελτίους εἶναι ἢ τοὺς παρὰ Κεράμωνι δούλους ;
"And which do you think are the better, his slaves or your gentlefolk?"

846 ἐγὼ μὲν οἶμαι , ἔφη , τοὺς παρ’ ἐμοὶ ἐλευθέρους .
"My gentlefolk, I think."

847 οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , αἰσχρὸν τὸν μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν πονηροτέρων εὐπορεῖν , σὲ δὲ πολλῷ βελτίους ἔχοντα ἐν ἀπορίᾳ εἶναι ;
"Then is it not disgraceful that you with your gentlefolk should be in distress, while he is kept in affluence by his meaner household?"

848 νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ὁ μὲν γὰρ τεχνίτας τρέφει , ἐγὼ δ’ ἐλευθερίως πεπαιδευμένους .
"Of course his dependants are artisans, while mine have had a liberal education."

849 ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , τεχνῖταί εἰσιν οἱ χρήσιμόν τι ποιεῖν ἐπιστάμενοι ;
"What is an artisan? one who knows how to produce something useful?"

850 μάλιστά γ’ , ἔφη .
"Certainly."

851 οὐκοῦν χρήσιμά γ’ ἄλφιτα ;
"Are groats useful?"

852 σφόδρα γε .
"Yes, very."

853 τί δ’ ἄρτοι ;
"And bread?"

854 οὐδὲν ἧττον .
"No less so."

855 τί γάρ ;
"What then,"

856 ἔφη , ἱμάτιά τε ἀνδρεῖα καὶ γυναικεῖα καὶ χιτωνίσκοι καὶ χλαμύδες καὶ ἐξωμίδες ;
he said, "What about men’s and women’s cloaks, shirts, capes, smocks?"

857 σφόδρα γ’ , ἔφη , καὶ πάντα ταῦτα χρήσιμα .
"Yes, all these things too are very useful."

858 ἔπειτα , ἔφη , οἱ παρὰ σοὶ τούτων οὐδὲν ἐπίστανται ποιεῖν ;
"Then don’t the members of your household know how to make any of these?"

859	πάντα μὲν οὖν , ὡς ἐγώ- οἶμαι .
"I believe they can make all of them."

860	εἶτ’ οὐκ οἶσθα ὅτι ἀφ’ ἑνὸς μὲν τούτων , ἀλφιτοποιίας , Ναυσικύδης οὐ μόνον ἑαυτόν τε καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας τρέφει , ἀλλὰ πρὸς τούτοις καὶ ὗς πολλὰς καὶ βοῦς , καὶ περιποιεῖται τοσαῦτα ὥστε καὶ τῇ πόλει πολλάκις λειτουργεῖν , ἀπὸ δὲ ἀρτοποιίας Κύρηβος τήν τε οἰκίαν πᾶσαν διατρέφει καὶ ζῇ δαψιλῶς , Δημέας δ’ ὁ Κολλυτεὺς ἀπὸ χλαμυδουργίας , Μένων δ’ ἀπὸ χλανιδοποιίας , Μεγαρέων δ’ οἱ πλεῖστοι ἀπὸ ἐξωμιδοποιίας διατρέφονται ;

Don’t you know, then, that by manufacturing one of these commodities, namely groats, Nausicydes keeps not only himself and his family, but large herds of swine and cattle as well, and has so much to spare that he often undertakes costly public duties; that Cyrebus feeds his whole family well and lives in luxury by baking bread, Demeas of Collytus by making capes, Menon by making cloaks; and most of the Megarians make a good living out of smocks?

861	νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὗτοι μὲν γὰρ ὠνούμενοι βαρβάρους ἀνθρώπους ἔχουσιν , ὥστ’ ἀναγκάζειν ἐργάζεσθαι ἃ καλῶς ἔχει , ἐγὼ δ’ ἐλευθέρους τε καὶ συγγενεῖς .
Yes, of course; for they buy foreign slaves and can force them to make what is convenient, but my household is made up of gentlefolk and relations.

862	ἔπειτ’ , ἔφη , ὅτι ἐλεύθεροί τ' εἰσὶ καὶ συγγενεῖς σοι , οἴει χρῆναι αὐτοὺς μηδὲν ἄλλο ποιεῖν ἢ ἐσθίειν καὶ καθεύδειν ;

He then said, "Do you think that just because they are free and related to you, they should do nothing else but eat and sleep?

863	πότερον καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ἐλευθέρων τοὺς οὕτω ζῶντας ἄμεινον διάγοντας ὁρᾷς καὶ μᾶλλον εὐδαιμονίζεις ἢ τούς , ἃ ἐπίστανται χρήσιμα πρὸς τὸν βίον , τούτων ἐπιμελομένους ;

Do you see whether those other free people who live in this way are better off and happier than those who understand useful things for life, and take care of them?

864	ἢ τὴν μὲν ἀργίαν καὶ τὴν ἀμέλειαν αἰσθάνῃ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις πρός τε τὸ μαθεῖν , ἃ προσήκει ἐπίστασθαι , καὶ πρὸς τὸ μνημονεύειν , ἃ ἂν μάθωσι , καὶ πρὸς τὸ ὑγιαίνειν τε καὶ ἰσχύειν τοῖς σώμασι καὶ πρὸς τὸ κτήσασθαί τε καὶ σῴζειν τὰ χρήσιμα πρὸς τὸν βίον ὠφέλιμα ὄντα , τὴν δ' ἐργασίαν καὶ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν οὐδὲν χρήσιμα ;

Or does idleness and negligence benefit people when it comes to learning what they ought to know, remembering what they've learned, staying healthy and strong, acquiring and preserving useful things for life? Is work and diligence useless?

865	ἔμαθον δέ , ἃ φὴς αὐτὰς ἐπίστασθαι , πότερον ὡς οὔτε χρήσιμα ὄντα πρὸς τὸν βίον οὔτε ποιήσουσαι αὐτῶν οὐδέν , ἢ τ- ἐναντίον ὡς καὶ ἐπιμελησόμεναι τούτων καὶ ὠφελησόμεναι ἀπ’ αὐτῶν ;

But I have learned that what you say they understand, whether it's as if it's of no use to life, or if they won't do anything with it, or the opposite, if they will take care of it and benefit from it?

866	ποτέρως γὰρ ἂν μᾶλλον ἄνθρωποι σωφρονοῖεν , ἀργοῦντες ἢ τῶν χρησίμων ἐπιμελόμενοι ;

For in which way would people become wiser, by being idle or by taking care of useful things?

867	ποτέρως δ’ ἂν δικαιότεροι εἶεν , εἰ ἐργάζοιντο ἢ εἰ ἀργοῦντες βουλεύοιντο περὶ τῶν ἐπιτηδείων ;

And in which way would they be more just, if they worked or if they engaged in idle discussions about their needs?

868	ἀλλὰ καὶ νῦν μέν , ὡς ἐγώ- οἶμαι , οὔτε σὺ ἐκείνας φιλεῖς οὔτ’ ἐκείναι σέ , σὺ μὲν ἡγούμενος αὐτὰς ἐπιζημίους εἶναι σεαυτῷ , ἐκεῖναι δὲ σὲ ὁρῶσαι ἀχθόμενον ἐφ’ ἑαυταῖς 

But even now, as I think, neither do you love them nor do they love you. You consider them a burden to yourself, and they see you as troubled by them.

869	ἐκ δὲ τούτων κίνδυνος μείζω τε ἀπέχθειαν γίγνεσθαι καὶ τὴν προγεγονυῖαν χάριν μειοῦσθαι .

And from this, there is a greater danger of mutual dislike growing and diminishing the gratitude that existed before.

870	ἐὰν δὲ προστατήσῃς ὅπως ἐνεργοὶ ὦσι , σὺ μὲν ἐκείνας φιλήσεις , ὁρῶν ὠφελίμους σεαυτῷ οὔσας , ἐκεῖναι δὲ σὲ ἀγαπήσουσιν , αἰσθόμεναι χαίροντά σε αὐταῖς , τῶν δὲ προγεγονυιῶν εὐεργεσιῶν ἥδιον μεμνημένοι τὴν ἀπ’ ἐκείνων χάριν αὐξήσετε , καὶ ἐκ τούτων φιλικώτερόν τε καὶ οἰκειότερον ἀλλήλοις ἕξετε .

But if you take charge and ensure that they are active, you will indeed love them, seeing them as beneficial to yourself, and they will love you, feeling pleased with you. By recalling past favors, you will increase the gratitude from those favors, and from this, you will have a more friendly and intimate relationship with each other.

871	εἰ μὲν τοίνυν αἰσχρόν τι ἔμελλον ἐργάσασθαι , θάνατον ἀντ’ αὐτοῦ προαιρετέον ἦν ·

If, therefore, they were about to engage in something disgraceful, they should have chosen death instead.

872	νῦν δὲ ἃ μὲν δοκεῖ κάλλιστα καὶ πρεπωδέστατα γυναικὶ εἶναι ἐπίστανται , ὡς ἔοικε ·

But now, they understand what seems to be the most beautiful and fitting for a woman, it appears.

873	πάντες δὲ ἃ ἐπίστανται ῥᾷστά τε καὶ τάχιστα καὶ κάλλιστα καὶ ἥδιστα ἐργάζονται .

And everyone who understands their work does it with the greatest ease, speed, pride, and pleasure.

874	μὴ οὖν ὄκνει , ἔφη , ταῦτα εἰσηγεῖσθαι αὐταῖς ἃ σοί τε λυσιτελήσει κ- ἐκείναις ·

So do not hesitate, he said, to propose these things to them, which will be beneficial to both you and them.

875	καί , ὡς εἰκός , ἡδέως ὑπακούσονται .

And, as it is likely, they will willingly obey.

876	ἀλλὰ νὴ τοὺς θεούς , ἔφη ὁ Ἀρίσταρχος , οὕτω μοι δοκεῖς καλῶς λέγειν , ὦ Σώκρατες , ὥστε πρόσθεν μὲν οὐ προσιέμην δανείσασθαι , εἰδὼς ὅτι ἀναλώσας ὃ ἂν λάβω οὐχ ἕξω ἀποδοῦναι , νῦν δέ μοι δοκῶ εἰς ἔργων ἀφορμὴν ὑπομενεῖν αὐτὸ ποιῆσαι .

But by the gods, Aristarchus said, you seem to me to speak so well, Socrates, that I now think I should not have hesitated to borrow money before, knowing that I would not have been able to repay what I received. But now, it seems to me that I have a reason to embark on this work.

877	ἐκ τούτων δὲ ἐπορίσθη μὲν ἀφορμή , ἐωνήθη δὲ ἔρια ·

From these words, an opportunity was provided, and quarrels ceased.

878	καὶ ἐργαζόμεναι μὲν ἠρίστων , ἐργασάμεναι δὲ ἐδείπνουν , ἱλαραὶ δὲ ἀντὶ σκυθρωπῶν ἦσαν ·

And while they worked, they were happier, and after working, they had dinner, and they were cheerful instead of being gloomy.

879	καὶ ἀντὶ ὑφορωμένων ἑαυτοὺς ἡδέως ἀλλήλους ἑώρων , καὶ αἱ μὲν ὡς κηδεμόνα ἐφίλουν , ὁ δὲ ὡς ὠφελίμους ἠγάπα .

And instead of looking downcast, they looked at each other with pleasure. And the women loved him as their guardian, and he loved them as being helpful.

880	τέλος δὲ ἐλθὼν πρὸς τὸν Σωκράτην χαίρων διηγεῖτο ταῦτά τε καὶ ὅτι αἰτιῶνται αὐτὸν μόνον τῶν ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ ἀργὸν ἐσθίειν 

Finally, he came to Socrates with joy and told him about these things and how they blamed him alone in the household for eating the bread of idleness.

881	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·

And Socrates said:

882	εἶτα οὐ λέγεις αὐταῖς τὸν τοῦ κυνὸς λόγον ;

Then aren't you telling them the story of the dog?

883	φασὶ γάρ , ὅτε φωνήεντα ἦν τὰ ζῷα , τὴν οἶν πρὸς τὸν δεσπότην εἰπεῖν ·

For they say that when animals could speak, a sheep spoke to her master:

884	θαυμαστὸν ποιεῖς , ὃς ἡμῖν μὲν ταῖς καὶ ἔριά σοι καὶ ἄρνας καὶ τυρὸν παρεχούσαις οὐδὲν δίδως ὅ τι ἂν μὴ ἐκ τῆς γῆς λάβωμεν , τῷ δὲ κυνί , ὃς οὐδὲν τοιοῦτόν σοι παρέχει , μεταδίδως οὗπερ αὐτὸς ἔχεις σίτου .

"Do you find it strange that, while you provide us with nothing other than what we obtain from the land, such as wool, lambs, and cheese, you share your food with your dog, who does not provide you with anything like that?"

885	τὸν κύνα οὖν ἀκούσαντα εἰπεῖν ·

Then, upon hearing this, the dog said:

886	ναὶ μὰ Δί’ ·

"Yes, by Zeus,"

887	ἐγὼ γάρ εἰμι ὁ καὶ ὑμᾶς αὐτὰς σῴζων ὥστε μήτε ὑπ’ ἀνθρώπων κλέπτεσθαι μήτε ὑπὸ λύκων ἁρπάζεσθαι ·

"I am the one who saves you, so that you are not stolen by humans or carried off by wolves."

888	ἐπεὶ ὑμεῖς γε , εἰ μὴ ἐγὼ προφυλάττοιμι ὑμᾶς , οὐδ’ ἂν νέμεσθαι δύναισθε , φοβούμεναι μὴ ἀπόλησθε .

"For if it were not for me guarding you, you wouldn't even be able to graze, fearing that you might be lost."

889	οὕτω δὴ λέγεται καὶ τὰ πρόβατα συγχωρῆσαι τὸν κύνα προτιμᾶσθαι .

So, they say, the sheep agreed and preferred the dog.

890	καὶ σὺ οὖν ἐκείναις λέγε ὅτι ἀντὶ κυνὸς εἶ φύλαξ καὶ ἐπιμελητής , καὶ διὰ σὲ οὐδ’ ὑφ’ ἑνὸς ἀδικούμεναι ἀσφαλῶς τε καὶ ἡδέως ἐργαζόμεναι ζῶσιν .

So, you should tell them that you are their guard and caretaker, and because of you, they live and work safely and comfortably, without being wronged by anyone.

891  
ἄλλον δέ ποτε ἀρχαῖον ἑταῖρον διὰ χρόνου ἰδών , πόθεν , ἔφη , Εὔθηρε , φαίνῃ ;  
"Where do you come from, Eutherus?" he said.

892  
ὑπὸ μὲν τὴν κατάλυσιν τοῦ πολέμου , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἐκ τῆς ἀποδημίας , νυνὶ μέντοι αὐτόθεν .  
"I came home when the war ended, Socrates, and am now living here," he replied.

893  
ἐπειδὴ γὰρ ἀφῃρέθημεν τὰ ἐν τῇ ὑπερορίᾳ κτήματα , ἐν δὲ τῇ Ἀττικῇ ὁ πατήρ μοι οὐδὲν κατέλιπεν , ἀναγκάζομαι νῦν ἐπιδημήσας τῷ σώματι ἐργαζόμενος τὰ ἐπιτήδεια πορίζεσθαι .  
"Since we have lost our foreign property, and my father left me nothing in Attica, I am forced to settle down here now and work for my living with my hands. I think it’s better than begging, especially as I have no security to offer for a loan."

894  
δοκεῖ δέ μοι τοῦτο κρεῖττον εἶναι ἢ δεῖσθαί τινος ἀνθρώπων , ἄλλως τε καὶ μηδὲν ἔχοντα ἐφ’ ὅτῳ ἂν δανειζοίμην .  
[Continuation of previous translation]

895  
καὶ πόσον χρόνον οἴει σοι , ἔφη , τὸ σῶμα ἱκανὸν εἶναι μισθοῦ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἐργάζεσθαι ;  
"And how long will you have the strength, do you think, to earn your living by your work?" 

896  
μὰ τὸν Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐ πολὺν χρόνον .  
"Oh, not long, of course."

897  
καὶ μήν , ἔφη , ὅταν γε πρεσβύτερος γένῃ , δῆλον ὅτι δαπάνης μὲν δεήσῃ , μισθὸν δὲ οὐδείς σοι θελήσει τῶν τοῦ σώματος ἔργων διδόναι .  
"But remember, when you get old you will have to spend money, and nobody will be willing to pay you for your labor."

898  
ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .  
"True."

899  
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , κρεῖττόν ἐστιν αὐτόθεν τοῖς τοιούτοις τῶν ἔργων ἐπιτίθεσθαι , ἃ καὶ πρεσβυτέρῳ γενομένῳ ἐπαρκέσει , καὶ προσελθόντα τῳ τῶν πλείω χρήματα κεκτημένων , τῷ δεομένῳ τοῦ συνεπιμελησομένου , ἔργων τε ἐπιστατοῦντα καὶ συγκομίζοντα τοὺς καρποὺς καὶ συμφυλάττοντα τὴν οὐσίαν , ὠφελοῦντα ἀντωφελεῖσθαι .  
"Then it would be better to take up some kind of work at once that will assure you a competence when you get old, and to go to somebody who is better off and wants an assistant, and get a return for your services by acting as his bailiff, helping to get in his crops and looking after his property."

900. χαλεπῶς ἄν, ἔφη, ἐγώ, ὦ Σώκρατες, δουλείαν ὑπομείναιμι.
Translation:
I shouldn't like to make myself a slave, said Socrates.
901. καὶ μὴν οἵ γε ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι προστατεύοντες καὶ τῶν δημοσίων ἐπιμελούμενοι οὐ δουλοπρεπέστεροι ἕνεκα τούτου, ἀλλ’ ἐλευθεριώτεροι νομίζονται.
Translation:
But surely those who control their cities and take charge of public affairs are thought more respectable, not more slavish on that account.
902. ὅλως, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, τὸ ὑπαίτιον εἶναί τινι οὐ πάνυ προσίεμαι.
Translation:
Briefly, Socrates, I have no inclination to expose myself to any man's censure.
903. καὶ μήν, ἔφη, Εὔθηρε, οὐ πάνυ γε ῥᾴδιόν ἐστιν εὑρεῖν ἔργον ἐφ’ ᾧ οὐκ ἄν τις αἰτίαν ἔχοι.
Translation:
But, you see, Eutherus, it is by no means easy to find a post in which one is not liable to censure. 
904. χαλεπὸν γὰρ οὕτω τι ποιῆσαι ὥστε μηδὲν ἁμαρτεῖν, χαλεπὸν δὲ καὶ ἀναμαρτήτως τι ποιήσαντα μὴ ἀγνώμονι κριτῇ περιτυχεῖν.
Translation:
Whatever one does, it is difficult to avoid mistakes, and it is difficult to escape unfair criticism even if one makes no mistakes.

905
ἐπεὶ καὶ οἷς νῦν ἐργάζεσθαι φῂς θαυμάζω εἰ ῥᾴδιόν ἐστιν ἀνέγκλητον διαγίγνεσθαι .
"I wonder if you find it easy to avoid complaints entirely even from your present employers."

906
χρὴ οὖν πειρᾶσθαι τοὺς φιλαιτίους φεύγειν καὶ τοὺς εὐγνώμονας διώκειν , καὶ τῶν πραγμάτων ὅσα μὲν δύνασαι ποιεῖν ὑπομένειν , ὅσα δὲ μὴ δύνασαι φυλάττεσθαι , ὅ τι δ’ ἂν πράττῃς , τούτου ὡς κάλλιστα καὶ προθυμότατα ἐπιμελεῖσθαι .
"You should try, therefore, to have no truck with grumblers and to attach yourself to considerate masters; to undertake such duties as you can perform and beware of any that are too much for you, and, whatever you do, to give of your best and put your heart into the business."

907
οὕτω γὰρ ἥκιστ’ ἂν μέν σε οἶμαι ἐν αἰτίᾳ εἶναι , μάλιστα δὲ τῇ ἀπορίᾳ βοήθειαν εὑρεῖν , ῥᾷστα δὲ καὶ ἀκινδυνότατα ζῆν καὶ εἰς τὸ γῆρας διαρκέστατα .
"In this way, I think, you are most likely to escape censure, find relief from your difficulties, live in ease and security, and obtain an ample competence for old age."

908  
οἶδα δέ ποτε αὐτὸν καὶ Κρίτωνος ἀκούσαντα , ὡς χαλεπὸν ὁ βίος Ἀθήνησιν εἴη ἀνδρὶ βουλομένῳ τὰ ἑαυτοῦ πράττειν .  
I remember that he once heard Criton say that life at Athens was difficult for a man who wanted to mind his own business.

909  
νῦν γάρ , ἔφη , ἐμέ τινες εἰς δίκας ἄγουσιν , οὐχ ὅτι ἀδικοῦνται ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ , ἀλλ’ ὅτι νομίζουσιν ἥδιον ἄν με ἀργύριον τελέσαι ἢ πράγματα ἔχειν .  
"At this moment," Criton added, "actions are pending against me not because I have done the plaintiffs an injury, but because they think that I would sooner pay than have trouble."

910  
καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης , εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Κρίτων , κύνας δὲ τρέφεις , ἵνα σοι τοὺς λύκους ἀπὸ τῶν προβάτων ἀπερύκωσι ;  
"Tell me, Criton," said Socrates, "do you keep dogs to fend the wolves from your sheep?"

911  
καὶ μάλα , ἔφη ·  
"Certainly," replied Criton,

912  
μᾶλλον γάρ μοι λυσιτελεῖ τρέφειν ἢ μή .  
"because it pays me better to keep them."

913  
οὐκ ἂν οὖν θρέψαις καὶ ἄνδρα , ὅστις ἐθέλοι τε καὶ δύναιτο σοῦ ἀπερύκειν τοὺς ἐπιχειροῦντας ἀδικεῖν σε ;  
"Then why not keep a man who may be able and willing to fend off the attempts to injure you?"

914  
ἡδέως γ’ ἄν , ἔφη , εἰ μὴ φοβοίμην ὅπως μὴ ἐπ’ αὐτόν με τράποιτο .  
"I would gladly do so were I not afraid that he might turn on me."

915  
τί δ’ ;  
"What?"

916  
ἔφη , οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι πολλῷ ἥδιόν ἐστι χαριζόμενον οἵῳ σοὶ ἀνδρὶ ἢ ἀπεχθόμενον ὠφελεῖσθαι ;  
"Don’t you see that it is much pleasanter to profit by humouring a man like you than by quarrelling with him?"

917  
εὖ ἴσθι ὅτι εἰσὶν ἐνθάδε τῶν τοιούτων ἀνδρῶν , οἳ πάνυ ἂν φιλοτιμηθεῖεν φίλῳ σοι χρῆσθαι .  
"I assure you there are men in this city who would take pride in your friendship.

918  
καὶ ἐκ τούτων ἀνευρίσκουσιν Ἀρχέδημον , πάνυ μὲν ἱκανὸν εἰπεῖν τε καὶ πρᾶξαι , πένητα δέ ·  
Thereupon they sought out Archedemus, an excellent speaker and man of affairs, but poor.

919  
οὐ γὰρ ἦν οἷος ἀπὸ παντὸς κερδαίνειν , ἀλλὰ φιλόχρηστός τε καὶ ἔφη ῥᾷστον εἶναι ἀπὸ τῶν συκοφαντῶν λαμβάνειν .  
For he was not one of those who make money unscrupulously, but an honest man, and he would say that it was easy to take forfeit from false accusers.

920  
τούτῳ οὖν ὁ Κρίτων , ὁπότε συγκομίζοι ἢ σῖτον ἢ ἔλαιον ἢ οἶνον ἢ ἔρια ἤ τι ἄλλο τῶν ἐν ἀγρῷ γιγνομένων χρησίμων πρὸς τὸν βίον , ἀφελὼν ἂν ἔδωκε ·  
So whenever Criton was storing corn, oil, wine, wool, or other farm produce, he would make a present of a portion to Archedemus.

921  
καὶ ὁπότε θύοι , ἐκάλει , καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα πάντα ἐπεμελεῖτο .  
And when he sacrificed, he invited him, and in fact lost no similar opportunity of showing courtesy.

922  
νομίσας δὲ ὁ Ἀρχέδημος ἀποστροφήν οἱ τὸν Κρίτωνος οἶκον μάλα περιεῖπεν αὐτόν .  
Archedemus came to regard Criton’s house as a haven of refuge and constantly paid his respects to him.

923  
καὶ εὐθὺς τῶν συκοφαντούντων τὸν Κρίτωνα ἀνευρίσκει πολλὰ μὲν ἀδικήματα , πολλοὺς δ’ ἐχθρούς ·  
He soon found out that Criton’s false accusers had much to answer for and many enemies.

924  
καὶ προσεκαλέσατο εἰς δίκην δημοσίαν , ἐν ᾗ αὐτὸν ἔδει κριθῆναι ὅ τι δεῖ παθεῖν ἢ ἀποτεῖσαι .  
He brought one of them to trial on a charge involving damages or imprisonment.

925  
ὁ δὲ συνειδὼς αὑτῷ πολλὰ καὶ πονηρὰ πάντ’ ἐποίει ὥστε ἀπαλλαγῆναι τοῦ Ἀρχεδήμου .  
The defendant, conscious that he was guilty on many counts, did all he could to get quit of Archedemus.

926  
ὁ δὲ Ἀρχέδημος οὐκ ἀπηλλάττετο , ἕως τόν τε Κρίτωνα ἀφῆκε καὶ αὐτῷ χρήματα ἔδωκεν .  
But Archedemus refused to let him off until he withdrew the action against Criton and compensated him.

927  
ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦτό τε καὶ ἄλλα τοιαῦτα ὁ Ἀρχέδημος διεπράξατο , ἤδη τότε , ὥσπερ ὅταν νομεὺς ἀγαθὸν κύνα ἔχῃ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι νομεῖς βούλονται πλησίον αὐτοῦ τὰς ἀγέλας ἱστάναι , ἵνα τοῦ κυνὸς ἀπολαύωσιν , οὕτω δὴ καὶ Κρίτωνος πολλοὶ τῶν φίλων ἐδέοντο καὶ σφίσι παρέχειν φύλακα τὸν Ἀρχέδημον .  
Archedemus carried through several other enterprises of a similar kind; and now many of Criton’s friends begged him to make Archedemus their protector, just as when a shepherd has a good dog the other shepherds want to pen their flocks near his, in order to get the use of his dog.

928  
ὁ δὲ Ἀρχέδημος τῷ Κρίτωνι ἡδέως ἐχαρίζετο , καὶ οὐχ ὅτι μόνος ὁ Κρίτων ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ ἦν , ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ φίλοι αὐτοῦ .  
Archedemus was glad to humour Criton, and so there was peace not only for Criton but for his friends as well.

929  
εἰ δέ τις αὐτῷ τούτων οἷς ἀπήχθετο ὀνειδίζοι ὡς ὑπὸ Κρίτωνος ὠφελούμενος κολακεύοι αὐτόν , πότερον οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Ἀρχέδημος , αἰσχρόν ἐστιν εὐεργετούμενον ὑπὸ χρηστῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ ἀντευεργετοῦντα τοὺς μὲν τοιούτους φίλους ποιεῖσθαι , τοῖς δὲ πονηροῖς διαφέρεσθαι , ἢ τοὺς μὲν καλοὺς κ- ἀγαθοὺς ἀδικεῖν πειρώμενον ἐχθροὺς ποιεῖσθαι , τοῖς δὲ πονηροῖς συνεργοῦντα πειρᾶσθαι φίλους ποιεῖσθαι καὶ χρῆσθαι τούτοις ἀντ’ ἐκείνων ;  
If anyone whom he had offended reproached Archedemus with flattering Criton because he found him useful, he would answer, "Which, then, is disgraceful: to have honest men for your friends, by accepting and returning their favours, and to fall out with rogues; or to treat gentlemen as enemies by trying to injure them, and to make friends of rogues by siding with them, and to prefer their intimacy?"

930  
ἐκ δὲ τούτου εἷς τε τῶν Κρίτωνος φίλων Ἀρχέδημος ἦν καὶ ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων Κρίτωνος φίλων ἐτιμᾶτο .  
Henceforward Archedemus was respected by Criton’s friends and was himself numbered among them.

931  
οἶδα δὲ καὶ Διοδώρῳ αὐτὸν ἑταίρῳ ὄντι τοιάδε διαλεχθέντα ·  
Again I recall the following conversation between him and his companion Diodorus.

932  
εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Διόδωρε , ἄν τίς σοι τῶν οἰκετῶν ἀποδρᾷ , ἐπιμελῇ , ὅπως ἀνασώσῃ ;  
"Tell me, Diodorus," he said, "if one of your servants runs away, do you take steps to bring him back safe?"

933  
καὶ ἄλλους γε νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , παρακαλῶ , σῶστρα τούτου ἀνακηρύττων .  
"Certainly," he replied, "and I ask others to help in the search."

933  
καὶ ἄλλους γε νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , παρακαλῶ , σῶστρα τούτου ἀνακηρύττων .  
"Yes, of course," he replied, "and I invite others to help, by offering a reward for the recovery of the man."

934  
τί γάρ ;  
"And further,"

935  
ἔφη , ἐάν τίς σοι κάμνῃ τῶν οἰκετῶν , τούτου ἐπιμελῇ καὶ παρακαλεῖς ἰατρούς , ὅπως μὴ ἀποθάνῃ ;  
"if one of your servants is ill, do you take care of him and call in doctors to prevent him dying?"

936  
σφόδρα γ’ , ἔφη .  
"Indeed I do."

937  
εἰ δέ τίς σοι τῶν γνωρίμων , ἔφη , πολὺ τῶν οἰκετῶν χρησιμώτερος ὢν κινδυνεύει δι’ ἔνδειαν ἀπολέσθαι , οὐκ οἴει σοι ἄξιον εἶναι ἐπιμεληθῆναι ὅπως διασωθῇ ;  
"Well, suppose that one of your acquaintances, who is much more useful than your servants, is near being ruined by want, don’t you think it worth your while to take steps to save him?"

938  
καὶ μὴν οἶσθά γε ὅτι οὐκ ἀγνώμων ἐστὶν Ἑρμογένης , αἰσχύνοιτο δ’ ἄν , εἰ ὠφελούμενος ὑπὸ σοῦ μὴ ἀντωφελοίη σε ·  
"Now you know that Hermogenes is a conscientious man and would be ashamed to take a favour from you without making a return."

939  
καίτοι τὸ ὑπηρέτην ἑκόντα τε καὶ εὔνουν καὶ παραμόνιμον καὶ τὸ κελευόμενον ἱκανὸν ποιεῖν ἔχειν , καὶ μὴ μόνον τὸ κελευόμενον ἱκανὸν ὄντα ποιεῖν , ἀλλὰ δυνάμενον καὶ ἀφ’ ἑαυτοῦ χρήσιμον εἶναι καὶ προνοεῖν καὶ προβουλεύεσθαι πολλῶν οἰκετῶν οἶμαι ἀντάξιον εἶναι .  
"Yet surely it is worth many servants to have a willing, loyal, staunch subordinate, capable of doing what he is told, and not only so, but able to make himself useful unbidden, to think clearly and give advice."

940  
οἱ μέντοι ἀγαθοὶ οἰκονόμοι , ὅταν τὸ πολλοῦ ἄξιον μικροῦ ἐξῇ πρίασθαι , τότε φασὶ δεῖν ὠνεῖσθαι ·  
"Good householders, you know, say that the right time to buy is when a valuable article can be bought at a low price;"

941  
νῦν δὲ διὰ τὰ πράγματα εὐωνοτάτους ἔστι φίλους ἀγαθοὺς κτήσασθαι .  
"and in these times the circumstances afford an opportunity of acquiring good friends very cheap."

942  
καὶ ὁ Διόδωρος , ἀλλὰ καλῶς γε , ἔφη , λέγεις , ὦ Σώκρατες , καὶ κέλευσον ἐλθεῖν ὡς ἐμὲ τὸν Ἑρμογένην .  
"Thank you, Socrates," said Diodorus, "pray bid Hermogenes call on me."

943  
μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐκ ἔγωγε ·  
"No, indeed I won’t," said he;

944  
νομίζω γὰρ οὔτε σοὶ κάλλιον εἶναι τὸ καλέσαι ἐκεῖνον τοῦ αὐτὸν ἐλθεῖν πρὸς ἐκεῖνον οὔτ’ ἐκείνῳ μεῖζον ἀγαθὸν τὸ πραχθῆναι ταῦτα ἢ σοί .  
"for in my opinion it is at least as good for you to go to him yourself as to invite him to come to you, and you have quite as much to gain as he by doing so."

945  
οὕτω δὴ ὁ Διόδωρος ᾤχετο πρὸς τὸν Ἑρμογένην ·  
The consequence was that Diodorus set off to visit Hermogenes;

946  
καὶ οὐ πολὺ τελέσας ἐκτήσατο φίλον , ὃς ἔργον εἶχε σκοπεῖν ὅ τι ἂν ἢ λέγων ἢ πράττων ὠφελοίη τε καὶ εὐφραίνοι Διόδωρον .  
and in return for a small sum he acquired a friend who made a point of thinking how he could help and please him either by word or deed.

947  
ὅτι δὲ τοὺς ὀρεγομένους τῶν καλῶν ἐπιμελεῖς ὧν ὀρέγοιντο ποιῶν ὠφέλει , νῦν τοῦτο διηγήσομαι .  
I will now explain how he helped those who were eager to win distinction by making them qualify themselves for the honours they coveted.

948  
ἀκούσας γάρ ποτε Διονυσόδωρον εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἥκειν ἐπαγγελλόμενον στρατηγεῖν διδάξειν , ἔλεξε πρός τινα τῶν συνόντων , ὃν ᾐσθάνετο βουλόμενον τῆς τιμῆς ταύτης ἐν τῇ πόλει τυχεῖν ·  
He once heard that Dionysodorus had arrived at Athens, and gave out that he was going to teach generalship. Being aware that one of his companions wished to obtain the office of general from the state, he addressed him thus:


949  
αἰσχρὸν μέντοι , ὦ νεανία , τὸν βουλόμενον ἐν τῇ πόλει στρατηγεῖν , ἐξὸν τοῦτο μαθεῖν , ἀμελῆσαι αὐτοῦ ·  
"Young man, surely it would be disgraceful for one who wishes to be a general in the state to neglect the opportunity of learning the duties,"

950  
καὶ δικαίως ἂν οὗτος ὑπὸ τῆς πόλεως ζημιοῖτο πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ εἴ τις ἀνδριάντας ἐργολαβοίη μὴ μεμαθηκὼς ἀνδριαντοποιεῖν .  
"and he would deserve to be punished by the state much more than one who carved statues without having learned to be a sculptor."

951  
ὅλης γὰρ τῆς πόλεως ἐν τοῖς πολεμικοῖς κινδύνοις ἐπιτρεπομένης τῷ στρατηγῷ , μεγάλα τά τε ἀγαθὰ κατορθοῦντος αὐτοῦ καὶ τὰ κακὰ διαμαρτάνοντος εἰκὸς γίγνεσθαι .  
"For in the dangerous times of war the whole state is in the general’s hands, and great good may come from his success and great evil from his failure."

952  
πῶς οὖν οὐκ ἂν δικαίως ὁ τοῦ μὲν μανθάνειν τοῦτο ἀμελῶν , τοῦ δὲ αἱρεθῆναι ἐπιμελόμενος ζημιοῖτο ;  
"Therefore anyone who exerts himself to gain the votes, but neglects to learn the business, deserves punishment."

953  
τοιαῦτα μὲν δὴ λέγων ἔπεισεν αὐτὸν ἐλθόντα μανθάνειν .  
"This speech persuaded the man to go and learn."

954  
ἐπεὶ δὲ μεμαθηκὼς ἧκε , προσέπαιζεν αὐτῷ λέγων ·  
"When he had learnt his lesson and returned, Socrates chaffed him."

955  
οὐ δοκεῖ ὑμῖν , ὦ ἄνδρες , ὥσπερ Ὅμηρος τὸν Ἀγαμέμνονα γεραρὸν ἔφη εἶναι , οὕτω καὶ ὅδε στρατηγεῖν μαθὼν γεραρώτερος φαίνεσθαι ;  
"Don’t you think, sirs," he said, "that our friend looks more 'majestic,' as Homer called Agamemnon, now that he has learnt generalship?"

956  
καὶ γάρ , ὥσπερ ὁ κιθαρίζε

ιν μαθών , καὶ ἐὰν μὴ κιθαρίζῃ , κιθαριστής ἐστι , καὶ ὁ μαθὼν ἰᾶσθαι , κἂν μὴ ἰατρεύῃ , ὅμως ἰατρός ἐστιν , οὕτω καὶ ὅδε ἀπὸ τοῦδε τοῦ χρόνου διατελεῖ στρατηγὸς ὤν , κἂν μηδεὶς αὐτὸν ἕληται .  
"For just as he who has learnt to play the harp is a harper even when he doesn’t play, and he who has studied medicine is a doctor even though he doesn’t practise, so our friend will be a general for ever, even if no one votes for him."

957  
ὁ δὲ μὴ ἐπιστάμενος οὔτε στρατηγὸς οὔτε ἰατρός ἐστιν , οὐδ’ ἐὰν ὑπὸ πάντων ἀνθρώπων αἱρεθῇ .  
"But your ignoramus is neither general nor doctor, even if he gets every vote."

958  
ἀτάρ , ἔφη , ἵνα καί , ἐὰν ἡμῶν τις ἢ ταξιαρχῇ ἢ λοχαγῇ σοι , ἐπιστημονέστεροι τῶν πολεμικῶν ὦμεν , λέξον ἡμῖν πόθεν ἤρξατό σε διδάσκειν τὴν στρατηγίαν .  
"But," he continued, "in order that any one of us who may happen to command a regiment or platoon under you may have a better knowledge of warfare, tell us the first lesson he gave you in generalship."

959  
καὶ ὅς , ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ , ἔφη , εἰς ὅπερ καὶ ἐτελεύτα ·  
"The first was like the last," he replied; "he taught me tactics — nothing else."

960  
τὰ γὰρ τακτικὰ ἐμέ γε καὶ ἄλλ’ οὐδὲν ἐδίδαξεν .  
"He taught me tactics and nothing else."

961  
ἀλλὰ μήν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , τοῦτό γε πολλοστὸν μέρος ἐστὶ στρατηγίας .  
"But then that is only a small part of generalship," Socrates said.

962  
καὶ γὰρ παρασκευαστικὸν τῶν εἰς τὸν πόλεμον τὸν στρατηγὸν εἶναι χρή , καὶ ποριστικὸν τῶν ἐπιτηδείων τοῖς στρατιώταις , καὶ μηχανικὸν καὶ ἐργαστικὸν καὶ ἐπιμελῆ καὶ καρτερικὸν καὶ ἀγχίνουν , καὶ φιλόφρονά τε καὶ ὠμόν , καὶ ἁπλοῦν τε καὶ ἐπίβουλον , καὶ φυλακτικόν τε καὶ κλέπτην , καὶ προετικὸν καὶ ἅρπαγα καὶ φιλόδωρον καὶ πλεονέκτην καὶ ἀσφαλῆ καὶ ἐπιθετικόν , καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ καὶ φύσει καὶ ἐπιστήμῃ δεῖ τὸν εὖ στρατηγήσοντα ἔχειν .  
"For a general must also be capable of furnishing military equipment and providing supplies for the men; he must be resourceful, active, careful, hardy and quick-witted; he must be both gentle and brutal, at once straightforward and designing, capable of both caution and surprise, lavish and rapacious, generous and mean, skilful in defence and attack; and there are many other qualifications, some natural, some acquired, that are necessary to one who would succeed as a general."

963  
καλὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ τακτικὸν εἶναι ·  
"It is well to understand tactics too;"

964  
πολὺ γὰρ διαφέρει στράτευμα τεταγμένον ἀτάκτου , ὥσπερ λίθοι τε καὶ πλίνθοι καὶ ξύλα καὶ κέραμος ἀτάκτως μὲν ἐρριμμένα οὐδὲν χρήσιμά ἐστιν , ἐπειδὰν δὲ ταχθῇ κάτω μὲν καὶ ἐπιπολῆς τὰ μήτε σηπόμενα μήτε τηκόμενα , οἵ τε λίθοι καὶ ὁ κέραμος , ἐν μέσῳ δὲ αἵ τε πλίνθοι καὶ τὰ ξύλα , ὥσπερ ἐν οἰκοδομίᾳ συντίθεται , τότε γίγνεται πολλοῦ ἄξιον κτῆμα , οἰκία .  
"for there is a wide difference between right and wrong disposition of the troops, just as stones, bricks, timber, and tiles flung together anyhow are useless, whereas when the materials that neither rot nor decay, that is, the stones and tiles, are placed at the bottom and the top, and the bricks and timber are put together in the middle, as in building, the result is something of great value, a house, in fact."

965  
ἀλλὰ πάνυ , ἔφη ὁ νεανίσκος , ὅμοιον , ὦ Σώκρατες , εἴρηκας .  
"Your analogy is perfect, Socrates," said the youth.

966  
καὶ γὰρ ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ τοὺς ἀρίστους δεῖ πρώτους τάττειν καὶ τελευταίους , ἐν μέσῳ δὲ τοὺς χειρίστους , ἵνα ὑπὸ μὲν τῶν ἄγωνται , ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν ὠθῶνται .  
"For in war one must put the best men in the van and the rear, and the worst in the centre, that they may be led by the van and driven forward by the rearguard."

967  
εἰ μὲν τοίνυν , ἔφη , καὶ διαγιγνώσκειν σε τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς καὶ τοὺς κακοὺς ἐδίδαξεν ·  
"Well and good, provided that he taught you also to distinguish the good and the bad men."

968  
εἰ δὲ μή , τί σοι ὄφελος ὧν ἔμαθες ;  
"If not, what have you gained by your lessons?"

969  
οὐδὲ γὰρ εἴ σε ἀργύριον ἐκέλευσε πρῶτον μὲν καὶ τελευταῖον τὸ κάλλιστον τάττειν , ἐν μέσῳ δὲ τὸ χείριστον , μὴ διδάξας διαγιγνώσκειν τό τε καλὸν καὶ τὸ κίβδηλον , οὐδὲν ἄν σοι ὄφελος ἦν .  
"No more than you would have gained if he had ordered you to put the best money at the head and tail, and the worst in the middle, without telling you how to distinguish good from base coin."

970  
ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐκ ἐδίδαξεν ·  
"I assure you he didn’t,"

971  
ὥστε αὐτοὺς ἂν ἡμᾶς δέοι τούς τε ἀγαθοὺς καὶ τοὺς κακοὺς κρίνειν .  
"so we should have to judge for ourselves which are the good men and which are the bad."

972  
τί οὖν οὐ σκοποῦμεν , ἔφη , πῶς ἂν αὐτῶν μὴ διαμαρτάνοιμεν ;  
"Then we had better consider how we may avoid mistaking them."

973  
βούλομαι , ἔφη ὁ νεανίσκος .  
"I want to do so," said the youth.

974  
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , εἰ μὲν ἀργύριον δέοι ἁρπάζειν , τοὺς φιλαργυρωτάτους πρώτους καθιστάντες ὀρθῶς ἂν τάττοιμεν ;  
"Well now," said Socrates, "if we had to lay hands on a sum of money, would not the right arrangement be to put the most covetous men in the front?"

975  
ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ .  
"I think so."

976  
τί δὲ τοὺς κινδυνεύειν μέλλοντας ;  
"And what should we do with those who are going to face danger?"

977  
ἆρα τοὺς φιλοτιμοτάτους προτακτέον ;  
"Should our first line consist of the most ambitious?"

978  
οὗτοι γοῦν εἰσιν , ἔφη , οἱ ἕνεκα ἐπαίνου κινδυνεύειν ἐθέλοντες .  
"Oh yes: they are the men who will face danger for the sake of glory."

979  
οὐ τοίνυν οὗτοί γε ἄδηλοι , ἀλλ’ ἐπιφανεῖς πανταχοῦ ὄντες εὐαίρετοι ἂν εἶεν .  
"About these, now, there is no mystery: they are conspicuous everywhere, and so it is easy to find them."

980  
ἀτάρ , ἔφη , πότερά σε τάττειν μόνον ἐδίδαξεν , ἢ καὶ ὅπῃ καὶ ὅπως χρηστέον ἑκάστῳ τῶν ταγμάτων ;  
"But," said Socrates, "did he teach you only the disposition of an army, or did he include where and how to use each formation?"

981  
οὐ πάνυ , ἔφη .  
"Not at all," he replied.

982  
καὶ μὴν πολλά γ’ ἐστὶ πρὸς ἃ οὔτε τάττειν οὔτε ἄγειν ὡσαύτως προσήκει .  
"And yet there are many situations that call for a modification of tactics and strategy."

983  
ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐ διεσαφήνιζε ταῦτα .  
"I assure you he didn’t explain that."

984  
νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , πάλιν τοίνυν ἐλθὼν ἐπανερώτα ·  
"Then pray go back and ask him."

985  
ἂν γὰρ ἐπίστηται καὶ μὴ ἀναιδὴς ᾖ , αἰσχυνεῖται ἀργύριον εἰληφὼς ἐνδεᾶ σε ἀποπέμψασθαι .  
"If he knows and has a conscience, he will be ashamed to send you home ill-taught, after taking your money."

986  
ἐντυχὼν δέ ποτε στρατηγεῖν ᾑρημένῳ τῳ , τοῦ ἕνεκεν , ἔφη , Ὅμηρον οἴει τὸν Ἀγαμέμνονα προσαγορεῦσαι ποιμένα λαῶν ;  
"One day when he met a man who had been chosen general, he asked him, 'For what reason, think you, is Agamemnon dubbed 'Shepherd of the people' by Homer?"

987  
ἆρά γε ὅτι , ὥσπερ τὸν ποιμένα δεῖ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι , ὅπως σῶαί τε ἔσονται αἱ οἶες καὶ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἕξουσι καί , οὗ ἕνεκα τρέφονται , τοῦτο ἔσται , οὕτω καὶ τὸν στρατηγὸν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεῖ , ὅπως σῶοί τε οἱ στρατιῶται ἔσονται καὶ τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἕξουσι καί , οὗ ἕνεκα στρατεύονται , τοῦτο ἔσται ;  
"Is it because a shepherd must see that his sheep are safe and are fed, and that the object for which they are kept is attained, and a general must see that his men are safe and are fed, and that the object for which they fight is attained, or, in other words, that victory over the enemy may add to their happiness?"

988  
στρατεύονται δέ , ἵνα κρατοῦντες τῶν πολεμίων εὐδαιμονέστεροι ὦσιν .  
"They fight, indeed, to be more prosperous by overcoming the enemies."

989  
ἢ τί δήποτε οὕτως ἐπῄνεσε τὸν Ἀγαμέμνονα εἰπών ·  
"Or what reason can Homer have for praising Agamemnon by saying:"

990  
ἀμφότερον , βασιλεύς τ’ ἀγαθὸς κρατερός τ’ αἰχμητής ;  
"'both a good king and a doughty warrior too'?"

991  
ἆρά γε ὅτι αἰχμητής τε κρατερὸς ἂν εἴη , οὐκ εἰ μόνος αὐτὸς εὖ ἀγωνίζοιτο πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους , ἀλλ’ εἰ καὶ παντὶ τῷ στρατοπέδῳ τούτου αἴτιος εἴη , καὶ βασιλεὺς ἀγαθός , οὐκ εἰ μόνον τοῦ ἑαυτοῦ βίου καλῶς προεστήκοι , ἀλλ’ εἰ καί , ὧν βασιλεύοι , τούτοις εὐδαιμονίας αἴτιος εἴη ;  
"Is it because he would be 'a doughty warrior too' not if he alone were a good fighter, but if he made all his men like himself; and 'a good king' not if he merely ordered his own life aright, but if he made his subjects happy as well?"

992  
καὶ γὰρ βασιλεὺς αἱρεῖται οὐχ ἵνα ἑαυτοῦ καλῶς ἐπιμελῆται , ἀλλ’ ἵνα καὶ οἱ ἑλόμενοι δι’ αὐτὸν εὖ πράττωσι ·  
"Because a king is chosen, not to take good care of himself, but for the good of those who have chosen him;"

993  
καὶ στρατεύονται δὲ πάντες , ἵνα ὁ βίος αὐτοῖς ὡς βέλτιστος ᾖ , καὶ στρατηγοὺς αἱροῦνται τούτου ἕνεκα , ἵνα πρὸς τοῦτο αὐτοῖς ἡγεμόνες ὦσι .  
"and all men fight in order that they may get the best life possible, and choose generals to guide them to it."

994  
δεῖ οὖν τὸν στρατηγοῦντα τοῦτο παρασκευάζειν τοῖς ἑλομένοις αὐτὸν στρατηγόν ·  
"Therefore it is the duty of a commander to contrive this for those who have chosen him for general."

995  
καὶ γὰρ οὔτε κάλλιον τούτου ἄλλο ῥᾴδιον εὑρεῖν οὔτε αἴσχιον τοῦ ἐναντίου .  
"For anything more honourable than that is not easy to find, or anything more disgraceful than its opposite."

996  
καὶ οὕτως ἐπισκοπῶν τίς εἴη ἀγαθοῦ ἡγεμόνος ἀρετὴ τὰ μὲν ἄλλα περιῄρει , κατέλιπε δὲ τὸ εὐδαίμονας ποιεῖν ὧν ἂν ἡγῆται .  
"By these reflections on what constitutes a good leader he stripped away all other virtues, and left just the power to make his followers happy."

997  
καὶ ἱππαρχεῖν δέ τινι ᾑρημένῳ οἶδά ποτε αὐτὸν τοιάδε διαλεχθέντα ·  
"Again, when someone had been chosen a leader of cavalry, I remember that Socrates conversed with him in the following manner:"

998  
ἔχοις ἄν , ἔφη , ὦ νεανία , εἰπεῖν ἡμῖν ὅτου ἕνεκα ἐπεθύμησας ἱππαρχεῖν ;  
"Young man," he said, "can you tell us why you hankered after a cavalry command?"

999  
οὐ γὰρ δὴ τοῦ πρῶτος τῶν ἱππέων ἐλαύνειν ·  
"I presume it was not to be first of the cavalry in the charge;"

1000  
καὶ γὰρ οἱ ἱπποτοξόται τούτου γε ἀξιοῦνται ·  
"for that privilege belongs to the mounted archers;"

1001  
προελαύνουσι γοῦν καὶ τῶν ἱππάρχων .  
"at any rate they ride ahead of their commanders even."

1002  
ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .  
"True," he replied.

1003  
ἀλλὰ μὴν οὐδὲ τοῦ γνωσθῆναί γε ·  
"Nor was it to get yourself known either."

1004  
ἐπεὶ καὶ οἱ μαινόμενοί γε ὑπὸ πάντων γιγνώσκονται .  
"Even madmen are known to everyone."

1005  
ἀληθές , ἔφη , καὶ τοῦτο λέγεις .  
"True," he said, "you speak correctly."

1006  
ἀλλ’ ἄρα ὅτι τὸ ἱππικὸν οἴει τῇ πόλει βέλτιον ἂν ποιήσας παραδοῦναι καί , εἴ τις χρεία γίγνοιτο ἱππέων , τούτων ἡγούμενος ἀγαθοῦ τινος αἴτιος γενέσθαι τῇ πόλει ;  
"But perhaps you think you can hand over the cavalry in better condition to the state when you retire, and can do something for the good of the state as a cavalry leader, in case there is any occasion to employ that arm?"

1007  
καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .  
"Yes, certainly," he said.

1008  
καὶ ἔστι γε νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , καλόν , ἐὰν δύνῃ ταῦτα ποιῆσαι .  
"Yes," said Socrates, "and no doubt it is a fine thing if you can do that."

1009  
ἡ δὲ ἀρχή που ἐφ’ ἧς ᾕρησαι ἵππων τε καὶ ἀμβατῶν ἐστιν .  
"The command, I presume, for which you have been chosen, is the command of horses and riders."

1010  
ἔστι γὰρ οὖν , ἔφη .  
"Indeed it is."

1011  
ἴθι δὴ λέξον ἡμῖν τοῦτο πρῶτον , ὅπως διανοῇ τοὺς ἵππους βελτίους ποιῆσαι .  
"Come then, tell us first how you propose to improve the horses."

1012  
καὶ ὅς , ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μέν , ἔφη , οὐκ ἐμὸν οἶμαι τὸ ἔργον εἶναι , ἀλλὰ ἰδίᾳ ἕκαστον δεῖν τοῦ ἑαυτοῦ ἵππου ἐπιμελεῖσθαι .  
"Oh, but I don’t think that is my business. Every man must look after his own horse."

1013  
ἐὰν οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , παρέχωνταί σοι τοὺς ἵππους οἱ μὲν οὕτω κακόποδας ἢ κακοσκελεῖς ἢ ἀσθενεῖς , οἱ δὲ οὕτως ἀτρόφους , ὥστε μὴ δύνασθαι ἀκολουθεῖν , οἱ δὲ οὕτως ἀναγώγους ὥστε μὴ μένειν ὅπου ἂν σὺ τά

ξῃς , οἱ δὲ οὕτω λακτιστὰς ὥστε μηδὲ τάξαι δυνατὸν εἶναι , τί σοι τοῦ ἱππικοῦ ὄφελος ἔσται ;  
"Then if some of your men appear on parade with their horses ailing or suffering from bad feet or sore legs, others with underfed animals that can’t go the pace, others with restive brutes that won’t keep in line, others with such bad kickers that it is impossible to line them up at all, what will you be able to make of your cavalry?"

1014  
ἢ πῶς δυνήσῃ τοιούτων ἡγούμενος ἀγαθόν τι ποιῆσαι τὴν πόλιν ;  
"how will you be able to do the state any good with a command like that?"

1015  
καὶ ὅς , ἀλλὰ καλῶς τε λέγεις , ἔφη , καὶ πειράσομαι τῶν ἵππων εἰς τὸ δυνατὸν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι .  
"I am much obliged to you," he replied, "and I will try to look after the horses carefully."

1016  
τί δέ ; τοὺς ἱππέας οὐκ ἐπιχειρήσεις , ἔφη , βελτίονας ποιῆσαι ;  
"Won’t you also try to improve the men?" asked Socrates.

1017  
ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .  
"I will," he said.

1018  
οὐκοῦν πρῶτον μὲν ἀναβατικωτέρους ἐπὶ τοὺς ἵππους ποιήσεις αὐτούς ;  
"Then will you first train them to mount better?"

1019  
δεῖ γοῦν , ἔφη · καὶ γὰρ εἴ τις αὐτῶν καταπέσοι , μᾶλλον ἂν οὕτω σῴζοιτο .  
"Oh yes, I must," he replied, "so that if anyone is thrown he may have a better chance of saving himself."

1020  
τί γάρ ; ἐάν που κινδυνεύειν δέῃ , πότερον ἐπάγειν τοὺς πολεμίους ἐπὶ τὴν ἄμμον κελεύσεις , ἔνθαπερ εἰώθατε ἱππεύειν , ἢ πειράσῃ τὰς μελέτας ἐν τοιούτοις ποιεῖσθαι χωρίοις ἐν οἵοισπερ οἱ πόλεμοι γίγνονται ;  
"Further, when there is some danger before you, will you order them to draw the enemy into the sandy ground where your manoeuvres are held, or will you try to carry out your training in the kind of country that the enemy occupy?"

1021  
βέλτιον γοῦν , ἔφη .  
"Oh yes, that is the better way," he agreed.

1022  
τί γάρ ; τοῦ βάλλειν ὡς πλείστους ἀπὸ τῶν ἵππων ἐπιμέλειάν τινα ποιήσει ;  
"And again, will you pay much attention to bringing down as many of the enemy as possible without dismounting?"

1023  
βέλτιον γοῦν , ἔφη , καὶ τοῦτο .  
"Oh yes, that too is the better way," he said.

1024  
θήγειν δὲ τὰς ψυχὰς τῶν ἱππέων καὶ ἐξοργίζειν πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους , ἅπερ ἀλκιμωτέρους ποιεῖ , διανενόησαι ;  
"Have you thought of fostering a keen spirit among the men and hatred of the enemy, so as to make them more gallant in action?"

1025  
εἰ δὲ μή , ἀλλὰ νῦν γε πειράσομαι , ἔφη .  
"Well, at any rate, I will try to do so now," he replied.

1030
ὅπως δέ σοι πείθωνται οἱ ἱππεῖς πεφρόντικάς τι ;
"And have you considered how to make the men obey you?"

1031
ἄνευ γὰρ δὴ τούτου οὔτε ἵππων οὔτε ἱππέων ἀγαθῶν καὶ ἀλκίμων οὐδὲν ὄφελος .
"Because without that horses and men, however good and gallant, are of no use."

1032
ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη ·
"True," he said.

1033
ἀλλὰ πῶς ἄν τις μάλιστα , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἐπὶ τοῦτο αὐτοὺς προτρέψαιτο ;
"But what is the best way of encouraging them to obey, Socrates?"

1034
ἐκεῖνο μὲν δήπου οἶσθα , ὅτι ἐν παντὶ πράγματι οἱ ἄνθρωποι τούτοις μάλιστα ἐθέλουσι πείθεσθαι οὓς ἂν ἡγῶνται βελτίστους εἶναι .
"Well, I suppose you know that under all conditions human beings are most willing to obey those whom they believe to be the best."

1035
καὶ γὰρ ἐν νόσῳ , ὃν ἂν ἡγῶνται ἰατρικώτατον εἶναι , τούτῳ μάλιστα πείθονται , καὶ ἐν πλοίῳ οἱ πλέοντες , ὃν ἂν κυβερνητικώτατον , καὶ ἐν γεωργίᾳ , ὃν ἂν γεωργικώτατον .
"Thus in sickness they most readily obey the doctor, on board ship the pilot, on a farm the farmer, whom they think to be most skilled in his business."

1036
καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Yes, certainly," he said.

1037
οὐκοῦν εἰκός , ἔφη , καὶ ἐν ἱππικῇ , ὃς ἂν μάλιστα εἰδὼς φαίνηται ἃ δεῖ ποιεῖν , τούτῳ μάλιστα ἐθέλειν τοὺς ἄλλους πείθεσθαι .
"Then it is likely that in horsemanship too, one who clearly knows best what ought to be done will most easily gain the obedience of the others."

1038  
ἐὰν οὖν , ἔφη , ἐγώ , ὦ Σώκρατες , βέλτιστος ὢν αὐτῶν δῆλος ὦ , ἀρκέσει μοι τοῦτο εἰς τὸ πείθεσθαι αὐτοὺς ἐμοί ;  
"If then, Socrates, I am plainly the best horseman among them, will that suffice to gain their obedience?"

1039  
ἐάν γε πρὸς τούτῳ , ἔφη , διδάξῃς αὐτοὺς ὡς τὸ πείθεσθαί σοι κάλλιόν τε καὶ σωτηριώτερον αὐτοῖς ἔσται .  
"Yes, if you also show them that it will be safer and more honourable for them to obey you."

1040  
πῶς οὖν , ἔφη , τοῦτο διδάξω ;  
"How, then, shall I show that?"

1041  
πολὺ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ῥᾷον ἢ εἴ σοι δέοι διδάσκειν ὡς τὰ κακὰ τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀμείνω καὶ λυσιτελέστερά ἐστι .  
"Well, it’s far easier than if you had to show them that bad is better than good and more profitable."

1042  
λέγεις , ἔφη , σὺ τὸν ἵππαρχον πρὸς τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεῖν καὶ τοῦ λέγειν δύνασθαι ;  
"Do you mean that in addition to his other duties a cavalry leader must take care to be a good speaker?"

1043  
σὺ δ’ ᾤου , ἔφη , χρῆναι σιωπῇ ἱππαρχεῖν ;  
"Did you suppose that a commander of cavalry should be mum?"

1044  
ἢ οὐκ ἐντεθύμησαι ὅτι , ὅσα τε νόμῳ μεμαθήκαμεν κάλλιστα ὄντα , δι’ ὧν γε ζῆν ἐπιστάμεθα , ταῦτα πάντα διὰ λόγου ἐμάθομεν , καὶ εἴ τι ἄλλο καλὸν μανθάνει τις μάθημα , διὰ λόγου μανθάνει , καὶ οἱ ἄριστα διδάσκοντες μάλιστα λόγῳ χρῶνται καὶ οἱ τὰ σπουδαιότατα μάλιστα ἐπιστάμενοι κάλλιστα διαλέγονται ;  
"Did you never reflect that all the best we learned according to custom — the learning, I mean, that teaches us how to live — we learned by means of words, and that every other good lesson to be learned is learned by means of words; that

 the best teachers rely most on the spoken word and those with the deepest knowledge of the greatest subjects are the best talkers?"

1045  
ἢ τόδε οὐκ ἐντεθύμησαι , ὡς , ὅταν γε χορὸς εἷς ἐκ τῆσδε τῆς πόλεως γίγνηται , ὥσπερ ὁ εἰς Δῆλον πεμπόμενος , οὐδεὶς ἄλλοθεν οὐδαμόθεν τούτῳ ἐφάμιλλος γίγνεται οὐδὲ εὐανδρία ἐν ἄλλῃ πόλει ὁμοία τῇ ἐνθάδε συνάγεται ;  
"Did you never reflect that, whenever one chorus is selected from the citizens of this state — for instance, the chorus that is sent to Delos — no choir from any other place can compare with it, and no state can collect so goodly a company?"

1046  
ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .  
"You speak the truth," he said.

1047  
ἀλλὰ μὴν οὔτε εὐφωνίᾳ τοσοῦτον διαφέρουσιν Ἀθηναῖοι τῶν ἄλλων οὔτε σωμάτων μεγέθει καὶ ῥώμῃ , ὅσον φιλοτιμίᾳ , ἥπερ μάλιστα παροξύνει πρὸς τὰ καλὰ καὶ ἔντιμα .  
"And yet the reason is that Athenians excel all others not so much in singing or in stature or in strength, as in love of honour, which is the strongest incentive to deeds of honour and renown."

1048  
ἀληθές , ἔφη , καὶ τοῦτο .  
"True again," he said.

1049  
οὐκοῦν οἴει , ἔφη , καὶ τοῦ ἱππικοῦ τοῦ ἐνθάδε εἴ τις ἐπιμεληθείη , ὡς πολὺ ἂν καὶ τούτῳ διενέγκοιεν τῶν ἄλλων ὅπλων τε καὶ ἵππων παρασκευῇ καὶ εὐταξίᾳ καὶ τῷ ἑτοίμως κινδυνεύειν πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους , εἰ νομίσειαν ταῦτα ποιοῦντες ἐπαίνου καὶ τιμῆς τεύξεσθαι ;  
"Then don’t you think that if one took the same pains with our cavalry, they too would greatly excel others in arms and horses and discipline and readiness to face the enemy, if they thought that they would win glory and honour by it?"

1050  
εἰκός γε , ἔφη .  
"I expect so," he said.

1051  
μὴ τοίνυν ὄκνει , ἔφη , ἀλλὰ πειρῶ τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐπὶ ταῦτα προτρέπειν , ἀφ’ ὧν αὐτός τε ὠφελήσῃ καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι πολῖται διὰ σέ .  
"Don’t hesitate then, but try to encourage this keenness among the men: both you and your fellow-citizens will benefit by the results of your efforts."

1052  
ἀλλὰ νὴ Δία πειράσομαι , ἔφη .  
"Most certainly I will try," he said.

1053  
ἰδὼν δέ ποτε Νικομαχίδην ἐξ ἀρχαιρεσιῶν ἀπιόντα ἤρετο ·  
Once on seeing Nicomachides returning from the elections, he asked,

1054  
τίνες , ὦ Νικομαχίδη , στρατηγοὶ ᾕρηνται ;  
"Who have been

 chosen generals, Nicomachides?"

1055  
καὶ ὅς , οὐ γάρ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , τοιοῦτοί εἰσιν Ἀθηναῖοι , ὥστε ἐμὲ μὲν οὐχ εἵλοντο , ὃς ἐκ καταλόγου στρατευόμενος κατατέτριμμαι καὶ λοχαγῶν καὶ ταξιαρχῶν καὶ τραύματα ὑπὸ τῶν πολεμίων τοσαῦτα ἔχων — ἅμα δὲ καὶ τὰς οὐλὰς τῶν τραυμάτων ἀπογυμνούμενος ἐπεδείκνυεν — Ἀντισθένη δέ , ἔφη , εἵλοντο τὸν οὔτε ὁπλίτην πώποτε στρατευσάμενον ἔν τε τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν οὐδὲν περίβλεπτον ποιήσαντα ἐπιστάμενόν τε ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἢ χρήματα συλλέγειν ;  
“Isn’t it like the Athenians?" replied he, "they haven’t chosen me after all the hard work I have done, since I was called up, in the command of company or regiment, though I have been so often wounded in action” (and here he uncovered and showed his scars); “yet they have chosen Antisthenes, who has never served in a marching regiment nor distinguished himself in the cavalry and understands nothing but money-making.”

1056  
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , τοῦτο μὲν ἀγαθόν , εἴ γε τοῖς στρατιώταις ἱκανὸς ἔσται τὰ ἐπιτήδεια πορίζειν ;  
"Isn’t that a recommendation," said Socrates, "supposing he proves capable of supplying the men’s needs?"

1057  
καὶ γὰρ οἱ ἔμποροι , ἔφη ὁ Νικομαχίδης , χρήματα συλλέγειν ἱκανοί εἰσιν .  
"Why," retorted Nicomachides, "merchants too are capable of making money, but that doesn’t make them fit to command an army."

1058  
ἀλλ’ οὐχ ἕνεκα τούτου καὶ στρατηγεῖν δύναιντ’ ἄν .  
"But that doesn’t qualify them for generalship."

1059  
καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ·  
And Socrates said:

1060  
ἀλλὰ καὶ φιλόνικος Ἀντισθένης ἐστίν , ὃ στρατηγῷ προσεῖναι ἐπιτήδειόν ἐστιν ·  
"But Antisthenes also is eager for victory, and that is a good point in a general."

1061  
οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι καὶ ὁσάκις κεχορήγηκε πᾶσι τοῖς χοροῖς νενίκηκε ;  
"Whenever he has been choragus, you know, his choir has always won."

1062  
μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Νικομαχίδης , ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν ὅμοιόν ἐστι χοροῦ τε καὶ στρατεύματος προεστάναι .  
"No doubt," said Nicomachides, "but there is no analogy between the handling of a choir and of an army."

1063  
καὶ μήν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , οὐδὲ ᾠδῆς γε ὁ Ἀντισθένης οὐδὲ χορῶν διδασκαλίας ἔμπειρος ὢν ὅμως ἐγένετο ἱκανὸς εὑρεῖν τοὺς κρατίστους ταῦτα .  
"But, you see," said Socrates, "though Antisthenes knows nothing about music or choir training, he showed himself capable of finding the best experts in these."

1064  
καὶ ἐν τῇ στρατηγίᾳ οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Νικομαχίδης , ἄλλους μὲν εὑρήσει τοὺς τάξοντας ἀνθ’ ἑαυτοῦ , ἄλλους δὲ τοὺς μαχουμένους .

  
"In the army too, then," said Nicomachides, "he will find other to command for him, and others to do the fighting."

1065  
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ἐάν γε καὶ ἐν τοῖς πολεμικοῖς τοὺς κρατίστους , ὥσπερ ἐν τοῖς χορικοῖς , ἐξευρίσκῃ τε καὶ προαιρῆται , εἰκότως ἂν καὶ τούτου νικηφόρος εἴη ·  
"And therefore," said Socrates, "if he finds out and prefers the best men in warfare as in choir training it is likely that he will be victorious in that too; and probably he will be more ready to spend on winning a battle with the whole state than on winning a choral competition with his tribe."

1066
καὶ δαπανᾶν δ’ αὐτὸν εἰκὸς μᾶλλον ἂν ἐθέλειν εἰς τὴν σὺν ὅλῃ τῇ πόλει τῶν πολεμικῶν νίκην ἢ εἰς τὴν σὺν τῇ φυλῇ τῶν χορικῶν .
and probably he will be more ready to spend on winning a battle with the whole state than on winning a choral competition with his tribe."

1067  
λέγεις σύ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ὡς τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀνδρός ἐστι χορηγεῖν τε καλῶς καὶ στρατηγεῖν ;  
"Do you mean to say, Socrates, that the man who succeeds with a chorus will also succeed with an army?"

1068  
λέγω ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη , ὡς , ὅτου ἄν τις προστατεύῃ , ἐὰν γιγνώσκῃ τε ὧν δεῖ καὶ ταῦτα πορίζεσθαι δύνηται , ἀγαθὸς ἂν εἴη προστάτης , εἴτε χοροῦ εἴτε οἴκου εἴτε πόλεως εἴτε στρατεύματος προστατεύοι .  
"I mean that, whatever a man controls, if he knows what he wants and can get it, he will be a good controller, whether he control a chorus, an estate, a city, or an army."

1069  
καὶ ὁ Νικομαχίδης , μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , οὐκ ἄν ποτε ᾤμην ἐγὼ σοῦ ἀκοῦσαι ὡς οἱ ἀγαθοὶ οἰκονόμοι ἀγαθοὶ στρατηγοὶ ἂν εἶεν .  
"Really, Socrates," cried Nicomachides, "I should never have thought to hear you say that a good business man would make a good general."

1070  
ἴθι δή , ἔφη , ἐξετάσωμεν τὰ ἔργα ἑκατέρου αὐτῶν , ἵνα εἰδῶμεν πότερον τὰ αὐτά ἐστιν ἢ διαφέρει τι .  
"Come then," said he, "let us review the duties of each, that we may know whether they are the same or different."

1071  
πάνυ γε , ἔφη .  
"By all means."

1072  
οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , τὸ μὲν τοὺς ἀρχομένους κατηκόους τε καὶ εὐπειθεῖς ἑαυτοῖς παρασκευάζειν ἀμφοτέρων ἐστὶν ἔργον ;  
"Is it not the duty of both to make their subordinates willing and obedient?"

1073  
καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .  
"Decidedly."

1074
τί δέ ; 
What then?

1075  
τὸ προστάττειν ἕκαστα τοῖς ἐπιτηδείοις πράττειν ;  
"And to put the right man in the right place?"

1076  
καὶ τοῦτ’ , ἔφη .  
"That is so."

1077  
καὶ μὴν τὸ

 τοὺς κακοὺς κολάζειν καὶ τοὺς ἀγαθοὺς τιμᾶν ἀμφοτέροις οἶμαι προσήκειν .  
"I suppose, moreover, that both should punish the bad and reward the good."

1078  
πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .  
"Yes, certainly."

1079  
τὸ δὲ τοὺς ὑπηκόους εὐμενεῖς ποιεῖσθαι πῶς οὐ καλὸν ἀμφοτέροις ;  
"Of course, both will do well to win the goodwill of those under them?"

1080  
καὶ τοῦτ’ , ἔφη .  
"That is so."

1081  
συμμάχους δὲ καὶ βοηθοὺς προσάγεσθαι δοκεῖ σοι συμφέρειν ἀμφοτέροις ἢ οὔ ;  
"Do you think that it is to the interest of both to attract allies and helpers?"

1082  
πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .  
"Yes, certainly."

1083  
ἀλλὰ φυλακτικοὺς τῶν ὄντων οὐκ ἀμφοτέρους εἶναι προσήκει ;  
"And should not both be able to keep what they have got?"

1084  
σφόδρα γ’ , ἔφη .  
"They should indeed."

1085  
οὐκοῦν καὶ ἐπιμελεῖς καὶ φιλοπόνους ἀμφοτέρους εἶναι προσήκει περὶ τὰ αὑτῶν ἔργα ;  
"And should not both be strenuous and industrious in their own work?"

1086	ταῦτα μέν , ἔφη , πάντα ὁμοίως ἀμφοτέρων ἐστίν ·
"All these are common to both; 

1087	ἀλλὰ τὸ μάχεσθαι οὐκέτι ἀμφοτέρων .
but fighting is not."


1088	ἀλλ’ ἐχθροί γέ τοι ἀμφοτέροις γίγνονται ;
"But surely both are bound to find enemies?"


1089	καὶ μάλα , ἔφη , τοῦτό γε .
"Oh yes, they are," he said.


1090	οὐκοῦν τὸ περιγενέσθαι τούτων ἀμφοτέροις συμφέρει ;
"Then is it not important for both to get the better of them?"



1091	πάνυ γ’ , ἔφη ·
"Undoubtedly; 

1092	ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖνο παρίης , ἂν δέῃ μάχεσθαι , τί ὠφελήσει ἡ οἰκονομική ;
but you don’t say how business capacity will help when it comes to fighting. 

1093	ἐνταῦθα δήπου καὶ πλεῖστον , ἔφη ·
That is just where it will be most helpful. 

1094	ὁ γὰρ ἀγαθὸς οἰκονόμος , εἰδὼς ὅτι οὐδὲν οὕτω λυσιτελές τε καὶ κερδαλέον ἐστίν , ὡς τὸ μαχόμενον τοὺς πολεμίους νικᾶν , οὐδὲ οὕτως ἀλυσιτελές τε καὶ ζημιῶδες , ὡς τὸ ἡττᾶσθαι , προθύμως μὲν τὰ πρὸς τὸ νικᾶν συμφέροντα ζητήσει καὶ παρασκευάσεται , ἐπιμελῶς δὲ τὰ πρὸς τὸ ἡττᾶσθαι φέροντα σκέψεται καὶ φυλάξεται , ἐνεργῶς δ’ , ἂν τὴν παρασκευὴν ὁρᾷ νικητικὴν οὖσαν , μαχεῖται , οὐχ ἥκιστα δὲ τούτων , ἐὰν ἀπαράσκευος ᾖ , φυλάξεται συνάπτειν μάχην .
For the good business man, through his knowledge that nothing profits or pays like a victory in the field, and nothing is so utterly unprofitable and entails such heavy loss as a defeat, will be eager to seek and furnish all aids to victory, careful to consider and avoid what leads to defeat, prompt to engage the enemy if he sees he is strong enough to win, and, above all, will avoid an engagement when he is not ready."

1095	μὴ καταφρόνει , ἔφη , ὦ Νικομαχίδη , τῶν οἰκονομικῶν ἀνδρῶν ·
"Don’t look down on business men, Nicomachides. 

1096	ἡ γὰρ τῶν ἰδίων ἐπιμέλεια πλήθει μόνον διαφέρει τῆς τῶν κοινῶν , τὰ δὲ ἄλλα παραπλήσια ἔχει , τὸ δὲ μέγιστον , ὅτι οὔτε ἄνευ ἀνθρώπων οὐδετέρα γίγνεται οὔτε δι’ ἄλλων μὲν ἀνθρώπων τὰ ἴδια πράττεται , δι’ ἄλλων δὲ τὰ κοινά .
For the management of private concerns differs only in point of number from that of public affairs. In other respects they are much alike, and particularly in this, that neither can be carried on without men, and the men employed in private and public transactions are the same.  

1097	οὐ γὰρ ἄλλοις τισὶν ἀνθρώποις οἱ τῶν κοινῶν ἐπιμελόμενοι χρῶνται ἢ οἷσπερ τὰ ἴδια οἰκονομοῦντες ·
For those who take charge of public affairs employ just the same men when they attend to their own;

1098	οἷς οἱ ἐπιστάμενοι χρῆσθαι καὶ τὰ ἴδια καὶ τὰ κοινὰ καλῶς πράττουσιν , οἱ δὲ μὴ ἐπιστάμενοι ἀμφοτέρωθι πλημμελοῦσι .
and those who understand how to employ them are successful directors of public and private concerns, and those who do not, fail in both."

1099 Περικλεῖ δέ ποτε τῷ τοῦ πάνυ Περικλέους υἱῷ διαλεγόμενος , ἐγώ τοι , ἔφη , ὦ Περίκλεις , ἐλπίδα ἔχω σοῦ στρατηγήσαντος ἀμείνω τε καὶ ἐνδοξοτέραν τὴν πόλιν εἰς τὰ πολεμικὰ ἔσεσθαι καὶ τῶν πολεμίων κρατήσειν.
Once when talking with the son of the great Pericles, he said: "For my part, Pericles, I feel hopeful that, now you have become general, our city will be more efficient and more famous in the art of war, and will defeat our enemies."

1100 καὶ ὁ Περικλῆς , βουλοίμην ἄν , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἃ λέγεις ·
"I could wish," answered Pericles, "that it might be as you say, Socrates; but how these changes are to come about I cannot see."

1101 ὅπως δὲ ταῦτα γένοιτ’ ἄν , οὐ δύναμαι γνῶναι .
"But how these changes are to come about I cannot see."

1102 βούλει οὖν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , διαλογιζόμενοι περὶ αὐτῶν ἐπισκοπῶμεν ὅπου ἤδη τὸ δυνατόν ἐστι ;
"Should you like to discuss them with me, then," said Socrates, "and consider how they can be brought about?"

1103 βούλομαι , ἔφη .
"I should."

1104 οὐκοῦν οἶσθα , ἔφη , ὅτι πλήθει μὲν οὐδὲν μείους εἰσὶν Ἀθηναῖοι Βοιωτῶν ;
"Do you know then, that in point of numbers the Athenians are not inferior to the Boeotians?"

1105 οἶδα γάρ , ἔφη .
"Yes, I know."

1106 σώματα δὲ ἀγαθὰ καὶ καλὰ πότερον ἐκ Βοιωτῶν οἴει πλείω ἂν ἐκλεχθῆναι ἢ ἐξ Ἀθηνῶν ;
"Do you think that the larger number of fine, well-developed men could be selected from among the Boeotians or the Athenians?"

1107 οὐδὲ ταύτῃ μοι δοκοῦσι λείπεσθαι .
"In that matter too they seem to be at no disadvantage."

1108 εὐμενεστέρους δὲ ποτέρους ἑαυτοῖς εἶναι νομίζεις ;
"Which do you think are the more united?"

1109	Ἀθηναίους ἔγωγε ·
"The Athenians, I should say, 

1110	Βοιωτῶν μὲν γὰρ πολλοὶ πλεονεκτούμενοι ὑπὸ Θηβαίων δυσμενῶς αὐτοῖς ἔχουσιν , Ἀθήνησι δὲ οὐδὲν ὁρῶ τοιοῦτον .
for many of the Boeotians resent the selfish behaviour of the Thebans. At Athens I see nothing of that sort."

1111	ἀλλὰ μὴν φιλοτιμότατοί γε καὶ φιλοφρονέστατοι πάντων εἰσίν ·  
And again, the Athenians are more ambitious and more high-minded than other peoples;

1112	ἅπερ οὐχ ἥκιστα παροξύνει κινδυνεύειν ὑπὲρ εὐδοξίας τε καὶ πατρίδος.  
and these qualities are among the strongest incentives to heroism and patriotic self-sacrifice.

1113	οὐδὲ ἐν τούτοις Ἀθηναῖοι μεμπτοί.  
Yes, in these respects too the Athenians need not fear criticism.

1114	καὶ μὴν προγόνων γε καλὰ ἔργα οὐκ ἔστιν οἷς μείζω καὶ πλείω ὑπάρχει ἢ Ἀθηναίοις ·  
And besides, none have inherited a past more crowded with great deeds;

1115	ᾧ πολλοὶ ἐπαιρόμενοι προτρέπονταί τε ἀρετῆς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι καὶ ἄλκιμοι γίγνεσθαι.  
and many are heartened by such a heritage and encouraged to care for virtue and prove their gallantry.

1116	ταῦτα μὲν ἀληθῆ λέγεις πάντα, ὦ Σώκρατες ·  
All you have said is true, Socrates.

1117	ἀλλ’ ὁρῷς, ὅτι, ἀφ’ οὗ ἥ τε σὺν Τολμίδῃ τῶν χιλίων ἐν Λεβαδείᾳ συμφορὰ ἐγένετο καὶ ἡ μεθ’ Ἱπποκράτους ἐπὶ Δηλίῳ, ἐκ τούτων τεταπείνωται μὲν ἡ τῶν Ἀθηναίων δόξα πρὸς τοὺς Βοιωτούς, ἐπῆρται δὲ τὸ τῶν Θηβαίων φρόνημα πρὸς τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ·  
But, you see, since the disasters sustained by Tolmides and the Thousand at Lebadea and by Hippocrates at Delium, the relations of the Athenians and Boeotians are changed: the glory of the Athenians is brought low, the pride of the Thebans is exalted;

1118	ὥστε Βοιωτοὶ μέν, οἱ πρόσθεν οὐδ’ ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν τολμῶντες Ἀθηναίοις ἄνευ Λακεδαιμονίων τε καὶ τῶν ἄλλων Πελοποννησίων ἀντιτάττεσθαι, νῦν ἀπειλ

οῦσιν αὐτοὶ καθ’ αὑτοὺς ἐμβαλεῖν εἰς τὴν Ἀττικήν, Ἀθηναῖοι δέ, οἱ πρότερον ὅτε Βοιωτοὶ μόνοι ἐγένοντο πορθοῦντες τὴν Βοιωτίαν, φοβοῦνται μὴ Βοιωτοὶ δῃώσωσι τὴν Ἀττικήν.  
and now the Boeotians, who formerly would not venture, even in their own country, to face the Athenians without help from Sparta and the rest of the Peloponnese, threaten to invade Attica by themselves, and the Athenians, who formerly overran Boeotia, fear that the Boeotians may plunder Attica.

1119	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης, ἀλλ’ αἰσθάνομαι μέν, ἔφη, ταῦτα οὕτως ἔχοντα ·  
Ah, I am aware of that, answered Socrates;

1120	δοκεῖ δέ μοι ἀνδρὶ ἀγαθῷ ἄρχοντι νῦν εὐαρεστοτέρως διακεῖσθαι ἡ πόλις.  
but the disposition of our city is now more to a good ruler’s liking.

1121	τὸ μὲν γὰρ θάρσος ἀμέλειάν τε καὶ ῥᾳθυμίαν καὶ ἀπείθειαν ἐμβάλλει, ὁ δὲ φόβος προσεκτικωτέρους τε καὶ εὐπειθεστέρους καὶ εὐτακτοτέρους ποιεῖ.  
For confidence breeds carelessness, slackness, disobedience: fear makes men more attentive, more obedient, more amenable to discipline.

1122	τεκμήραιο δ’ ἂν τοῦτο καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐν ταῖς ναυσίν ·
The behaviour of sailors is a case in point.  


1123	ὅταν μὲν γὰρ δήπου μηδὲν φοβῶνται, μεστοί εἰσιν ἀταξίας ·  
So long as they have nothing to fear, they are, I believe, an unruly lot,

1124	ἔστ’ ἂν δὲ ἢ χειμῶνα ἢ πολεμίους δείσωσιν, οὐ μόνον τὰ κελευόμενα πάντα ποιοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ σιγῶσι καραδοκοῦντες τὰ προσταχθησόμενα, ὥσπερ χορευταί.  
but when they expect a storm or an attack, they not only carry out all orders, but watch in silence for the word of command like choristers.

1125	ἀλλὰ μήν, ἔφη ὁ Περικλῆς, εἴ γε νῦν μάλιστα πείθοιντο, ὥρα ἂν εἴη λέγειν, πῶς ἂν αὐτοὺς προτρεψαίμεθα πάλιν ἀνερασθῆναι τῆς ἀρχαίας ἀρετῆς τε καὶ εὐκλείας καὶ εὐδαιμονίας.  
Well, exclaimed Pericles, if they are now in the mood for obedience, it seems time to say how we can revive in them a longing for the old virtue and fame and happiness.

1126	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, εἰ μὲν ἐβουλόμεθα χρημάτων αὐτοὺς ὧν οἱ ἄλλοι εἶχον ἀντιποιεῖσθαι, ἀποδεικνύντες αὐτοῖς ταῦτα πατρῷά τε ὄντα καὶ προσήκοντα μάλιστ’ ἂν οὕτως αὐτοὺς ἐξωρμῶμεν ἀντέχεσθαι τούτων ·  
If then, said Socrates, we wanted them to claim money that others held, the best way of egging them on to seize it would be to show them that it was their fathers’ money and belongs to them.

1127	ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῦ μετ’ ἀρετῆς πρωτεύειν αὐτοὺς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι βουλόμεθα, τοῦτ’ αὖ δεικτέον ἐκ παλαιοῦ μάλιστα προσῆκον αὐτοῖς, καὶ ὡς τούτου ἐπιμελόμενοι πάντων ἂν εἶεν κράτιστοι.  
As we want them to strive for pre-eminence in virtue, we must show that this belonged to them in old days, and that by striving for it they will surpass all other men.

1128	πῶς οὖν ἂν τοῦτο διδάσκοιμεν;  
How then can we teach this?

1129	οἶμαι μέν, εἰ τούς γε παλαιτάτους ὧν ἀκούομεν προγόνους αὐτῶν ἀναμιμνῄσκοιμεν αὐτοὺς ἀκηκοότας ἀρίστους γεγονέναι.  
I think by reminding them that their earliest ancestors of whom we have any account were, as they themselves have been told, the most valiant.

1130	ἆρα λέγεις τὴν τῶν θεῶν κρίσιν, ἣν οἱ περὶ Κέκροπα δι’ ἀρετὴν ἔκριναν;  
Do you refer to the judgment of the gods, which Cecrops delivered in his court because of his virtue?

1131	λέγω γάρ, καὶ τὴν Ἐρεχθέως γε τροφὴν καὶ γένεσιν, καὶ τὸν πόλεμον τὸν ἐπ’ ἐκείνου γενόμενον πρὸς τοὺς ἐκ τῆς ἐχομένης ἠπείρου πάσης, καὶ τὸν ἐφ’ Ἡρακλειδῶν πρὸς τοὺς ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ, καὶ πάντας τοὺς ἐπὶ Θησέως πολεμηθέντας, ἐν οἷς πᾶσιν ἐκεῖνοι δῆλοι γεγόνασι τῶν καθ’ ἑαυτοὺς ἀνθρώπων ἀριστεύσαντες ·  
Yes, and the care and birth of Erectheus, and the war waged in his day with all the adjacent country, and the war between the sons of Heracles and the Peloponnesians, and all the wars waged in the days of Theseus, in all of which it is manifest that they were champions among the men of their time.

1132	εἰ δὲ βούλει, ἃ ὕστερον οἱ ἐκείνων μὲν ἀπόγονοι, οὐ πολὺ δὲ πρὸ ἡμῶν γεγονότες ἔπραξαν, τὰ μὲν αὐτοὶ καθ’ αὑτοὺς ἀγωνιζόμενοι πρὸς τοὺς κυριεύοντας τῆς τε Ἀσίας πάσης καὶ τῆς Εὐρώπης μέχρι Μακεδονίας καὶ πλείστην τῶν προγεγονότων δύναμιν καὶ ἀφορμὴν κεκτημένους καὶ μέγιστα ἔργα κατειργασμένους, τὰ δὲ καὶ μετὰ Πελοποννησίων ἀριστεύοντες καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν ·  
You may add the victories of their descendants, who lived not long before our own day: some they gained unaided in their struggle with the lords of all Asia and of Europe as far as Macedonia, the owners of more power and wealth than the world had ever seen, who had wrought deeds that none had equalled; in others they were fellow-champions with the Peloponnesians both on land and sea. 

1133	οἳ δὴ καὶ λέγονται πολὺ διενεγκεῖν τῶν καθ’ αὑτοὺς ἀνθρώπων.  
These men, like their fathers, are reported to have been far superior to all other men of their time.

1134	λέγονται γάρ, ἔφη.  
Yes, that is the report of them.

1135	τοιγαροῦν πολλῶν μὲν μεταναστάσεων ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι γεγονυιῶν διέμειναν ἐν τῇ ἑαυτῶν, πολλοὶ δὲ ὑπὲρ δικαίων ἀντιλέγοντες ἐπέτρεπον ἐκείνοις, πολλοὶ δὲ ὑπὸ κρειττόνων ὑβριζόμενοι κατέφευγον πρὸς ἐκείνους.  
Therefore, though there have been many migrations in Greece, these continued to dwell in their own land: many referred to them their rival claims, many found a refuge with them from the brutality of the oppressor.

1136	καὶ ὁ Περικλῆς, καὶ θαυμάζω γ’, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἡ πόλις ὅπως ποτ’ ἐπὶ τὸ χεῖρον ἔκλινεν.  
Yes, Socrates, cried Pericles, and I wonder how our city can have become so degenerate.

1137	ἐγὼ μέν, ἔφη, οἶμαι, ὁ Σωκράτης, ὥσπερ καὶ ἀθληταί τινες διὰ τὸ πολὺ ὑπερενεγκεῖν καὶ κρατιστεῦσαι καταρρᾳθυμήσαντες ὑστερίζουσι τῶν ἀντιπάλων, οὕτω καὶ Ἀθηναίους πολὺ διενεγκόντας ἀμελῆσαι ἑαυτῶν καὶ διὰ τοῦτο χείρους γεγονέναι.  
My own view, replied Socrates, is that the Athenians, as a consequence of their great superiority, grew careless of themselves, and have thus become degenerate, much as athletes who are in a class by themselves and win the championship easily are apt to grow slack and drop below their rivals.

1138	νῦν οὖν, ἔφη, τί ἂν ποιοῦντες ἀναλάβοιεν τὴν ἀρχαίαν ἀρετήν;  
How, then, can they now recover their old virtue?

1139	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ·  
And Socrates said,

1140	οὐδὲν ἀπόκρυφον δοκεῖ μοι εἶναι, ἀλλ’ εἰ μὲν ἐξευρόντες τὰ τῶν προγόνων ἐπιτηδεύματα μηδὲν χεῖρον ἐκείνων ἐπιτηδεύοιεν, οὐδὲν ἂν χείρους ἐκείνων γενέσθαι·  
There is no mystery about it, as I think. If they find out the customs of their ancestors and practise them as well as they did, they will come to be as good as they were;

1141	εἰ δὲ μή, τούς γε νῦν πρωτεύοντας μιμούμενοι καὶ τούτοις τὰ αὐτὰ ἐπιτηδεύοντες, ὁμοίως μὲν τοῖς αὐτοῖς χρώμενοι οὐδὲν ἂν χείρους ἐκείνων εἶεν, εἰ δ’ ἐπιμελέστερον, καὶ βελτίους.  
or failing that, they need but to imitate those who now have the pre-eminence and to practise their customs, and if they are equally careful in observing them, they will be as good as they, and, if more careful, even better.

1142	λέγεις, ἔφη, πόρρω που εἶναι τῇ πόλει τὴν καλοκαγαθίαν.  
That means that it is a long march for our city to perfection.

1143	πότε γὰρ οὕτως Ἀθηναῖοι ὥσπερ Λακεδαιμόνιοι ἢ πρεσβυτέρους αἰδέσονται, οἳ ἀπὸ τῶν πατέρων ἄρχονται καταφρονεῖν τῶν γεραιτέρων, ἢ σωμασκήσουσιν οὕτως, οἳ οὐ μόνον αὐτοὶ εὐεξίας ἀμελοῦσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐπιμελομένων καταγελῶσι;  
For when will Athenians show the Lacedaemonian reverence for age, seeing that they despise all their elders, beginning with their own fathers? When will they adopt the Lacedaemonian system of training, seeing that they not only neglect to make themselves fit, but mock at those who take the trouble to do so?

1144	πότε δὲ οὕτω πείσονται τοῖς ἄρχουσιν, οἳ καὶ ἀγάλλονται ἐπὶ τῷ καταφρονεῖν τῶν ἀρχόντων;  
When will they reach that standard of obedience to their rulers, seeing that they make contempt of rulers a point of honour?

1145	ἢ πότε οὕτως ὁμονοήσουσιν, οἵ γε ἀντὶ μὲν τοῦ συνεργεῖν ἑαυτοῖς τὰ συμφέροντα ἐπηρεάζουσιν ἀλλήλοις καὶ φθονοῦσιν ἑαυτοῖς μᾶλλον ἢ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις, μάλιστα δὲ πάντων ἔν τε ταῖς ἰδίαις συνόδοις καὶ ταῖς κοιναῖς διαφέρονται καὶ πλείστας δίκας ἀλλήλοις δικάζονται καὶ προαιροῦνται μᾶλλον οὕτω κερδαίνειν ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων ἢ συνωφελοῦντες αὑτούς, τοῖς δὲ κοινοῖς ὥσπερ ἀλλοτρίοις χρώμενοι περὶ τούτων αὖ μάχονται καὶ ταῖς εἰς τὰ τοιαῦτα δυνάμεσι μάλιστα χαίρουσιν;  
Or when will they attain that harmony, seeing that, instead of working together for the general good, they are more envious and bitter against one another than against the rest of the world, are the most quarrelsome of men in public and private assemblies, most often go to law with one another, and would rather make profit of one another so than by mutual service, and while regarding public affairs as alien to themselves, yet fight over them too, and find their chief enjoyment in having the means to carry on such strife?

1146	ἐξ ὧν πολλὴ μὲν ἀτηρία καὶ κακία τῇ πόλει ἐμφύεται , πολλὴ δὲ ἔχθρα καὶ μῖσος ἀλλήλων τοῖς πολίταις ἐγγίγνεται , δι’ ἃ ἔγωγε μάλα φοβοῦμαι ἀεί , μή τι μεῖζον ἢ ὥστε φέρειν δύνασθαι κακὸν τῇ πόλει συμβῇ .
"So it comes about that mischief and evil grow apace in the city, enmity and mutual hatred spring up among the people, so that I am always dreading that some evil past bearing may befall the city."

1147	μηδαμῶς, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ὦ Περίκλεις, οὕτως ἡγοῦ ἀνηκέστῳ πονηρίᾳ νοσεῖν Ἀθηναίους.  
No, no, Pericles, don’t think the wickedness of the Athenians so utterly past remedy.

1148	οὐχ ὁρᾷς, ὡς εὔτακτοι μέν εἰσιν ἐν τοῖς ναυτικοῖς, εὐτάκτως δ’ ἐν τοῖς γυμνικοῖς ἀγῶσι πείθονται τοῖς ἐπιστάταις, οὐδένων δὲ καταδεέστερον ἐν τοῖς χοροῖς ὑπηρετοῦσι τοῖς διδασκάλοις;  
Don’t you see what good discipline they maintain in their fleets, how well they obey the umpires in athletic contests, how they take orders from the choir-trainers as readily as any?

1149	τοῦτο γάρ τοι, ἔφη, καὶ θαυμαστόν ἐστι, τὸ τοὺς μὲν τοιούτους πειθαρχεῖν τοῖς ἐφεστῶσι, τοὺς δὲ ὁπλίτας καὶ τοὺς ἱππέας, οἳ δοκοῦσι καλοκαγαθίᾳ προκεκρίσθαι τῶν πολιτῶν, ἀπειθεστάτους εἶναι πάντων.  
Ah yes, and strange indeed it is that such men submit themselves to their masters, and yet the infantry and cavalry, who are supposed to be the pick of the citizens for good character, are the most insubordinate.

1150	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη·  
Then Socrates asked,

1151	ἡ δὲ ἐν Ἀρείῳ πάγῳ βουλή, ὦ Περίκλεις, οὐκ ἐκ τῶν δεδοκιμασμένων καθίσταται;  
But what of the Court of the Areopagus, Pericles? Are not its members persons who have won approval?

1152	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη.  
Certainly.

1153	οἶσθα οὖν τινας, ἔφη, κάλλιον ἢ νομιμώτερον ἢ σεμνότερον ἢ δικαιότερον τάς τε δίκας δικάζοντας καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα πράττοντας;  
Then do you know of any who decide the cases that come before them and perform all their other functions more honourably, more in accordance with law, with more dignity and justice?

1154	οὐ μέμφομαι, ἔφη, τούτοις.  
I am not finding fault with the Areopagus.

1155	οὐ τοίνυν, ἔφη, δεῖ ἀθυμεῖν ὡς οὐκ εὐτάκτων ὄντων Ἀθηναίων.  
Then you must not despair of Athenian discipline.

1156	καὶ μὴν ἔν γε τοῖς στρατιωτικοῖς, ἔφη, ἔνθα μάλιστα δεῖ σωφρονεῖν τε καὶ εὐτακτεῖν καὶ πειθαρχεῖν, οὐδενὶ τούτων προσέχουσιν.  
But, you see, in the army, where good conduct, discipline, submission are most necessary, our people pay no attention to these things.

1157	ἴσως γάρ, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐν τούτοις οἱ ἥκιστα ἐπιστάμενοι ἄρχουσιν αὐτῶν.  
This may be due to the incompetence of the officers.

1158	οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι κιθαριστῶν μὲν καὶ χορευτῶν καὶ ὀρχηστῶν οὐδὲ εἷς ἐπιχειρεῖ ἄρχειν μὴ ἐπιστάμενος, οὐδὲ παλαιστῶν οὐδὲ παγκρατιαστῶν;  
You must have noticed that no one attempts to exercise authority over our harpists, choristers and dancers, if he is incompetent, nor over wrestlers or wrestlers who also box?

1159	ἀλλὰ πάντες οἱ τούτων ἄρχοντες ἔχουσι δεῖξαι ὁπόθεν ἔμαθον ταῦτα ἐφ’ οἷς ἐφεστᾶσι ·  
All who have authority over them can tell where they learned their business;

1160	τῶν δὲ στρατηγῶν οἱ πλεῖστοι αὐτοσχεδιάζουσιν.  
but most of our generals are improvisors.

1161	οὐ μέντοι σέ γε τοιοῦτον ἐγὼ νομίζω εἶναι, ἀλλ’ οἶμαί σε οὐδὲν ἧττον ἔχειν εἰπεῖν ὁπότε στρατηγεῖν ἢ ὁπότε παλαίειν ἤρξω μανθάνειν.  
However, I don’t suppose you are one of this sort. I suppose you can say when you began to learn strategy as well as when you began wrestling.

1162	καὶ πολλὰ μὲν οἶμαί σε τῶν πατρῴων στρατηγημάτων παρειληφότα διασῴζειν, πολλὰ δὲ πανταχόθεν συνηχέναι, ὁπόθεν οἷόν τε ἦν μαθεῖν τι ὠφέλιμον εἰς στρατηγίαν.  
Many of the principles, I think, you have inherited from your father, and many others you have gathered from every source from which you could learn anything useful to a general.

1163	οἶμαι δέ σε πολλὰ μεριμνᾶν, ὅπως μὴ λάθῃς σεαυτὸν ἀγνοῶν τι τῶν εἰς στρατηγίαν ὠφελίμων, καὶ ἐάν τι τοιοῦτον αἴσθῃ σεαυτὸν μὴ εἰδότα, ζητεῖν τοὺς ἐπισταμένους ταῦτα, οὔτε δώρων οὔτε χαρίτων φειδόμενον, ὅπως μάθῃς παρ’ αὐτῶν ἃ μὴ ἐπίστασαι καὶ συνεργοὺς ἀγαθοὺς ἔχῃς.  
I think, too, that you take much trouble that you may not unconsciously lack any knowledge useful to a general; and if you find that you don’t know anything, you seek out those who have the knowledge, grudging neither gifts nor thanks, that you may learn what you don’t know from them and may have the help of good coaching.

1164	καὶ ὁ Περικλῆς , οὐ λανθάνεις με , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἔφη , ὅτι οὐδ’ οἰόμενός με τούτων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ταῦτα λέγεις , ἀλλ’ ἐγχειρῶν με διδάσκειν ὅτι τὸν μέλλοντα στρατηγεῖν τούτων ἁπάντων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεῖ .
"I can see, Socrates, that in saying this you don’t really think I study these things, but you are trying to show me that one who is going to command an army must study all of them; and of course I admit that you are right."

1165	ὁμολογῶ μέντοι κ- ἐγώ σοι ταῦτα.  
I agree with you on these points.

1166	τοῦτο δ’, ἔφη, ὦ Περίκλεις, κατανενόηκας, ὅτι πρόκειται τῆς χώρας ἡμῶν ὄρη μεγάλα, καθήκοντα ἐπὶ τὴν Βοιωτίαν, δι’ ὧν εἰς τὴν χώραν εἴσοδοι στεναί τε καὶ προσάντεις εἰσί, καὶ ὅτι μέση διέζωται ὄρεσιν ἐρυμνοῖς;  
Have you observed, Pericles, that our frontier is protected by great mountains extending to Boeotia, through which there are steep and narrow passes leading into our land, and that the interior is cut across by rugged mountains?

1167	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη.  
Certainly.

1168	τί δέ;  
Further,

1169	ἐκεῖνο ἀκήκοας, ὅτι Μυσοὶ καὶ Πισίδαι ἐν τῇ βασιλέως χώρᾳ κατέχοντες ἐρυμνὰ πάνυ χωρία καὶ κούφως ὡπλισμένοι δύνανται πολλὰ μὲν τὴν βασιλέως χώραν καταθέοντες κακοποιεῖν, αὐτοὶ δὲ ζῆν ἐλεύθεροι;  
Have you heard that the Mysians and Pisidians, occupying very rugged country in the Great King’s territory and lightly armed, contrive to overrun and damage the King’s territory and to preserve their own freedom?

1170	καὶ τοῦτό γ’, ἔφη, ἀκούω.  
Yes, I have heard so.

1171	Ἀθηναίους δ’ οὐκ ἂν οἴει, ἔφη, μέχρι τῆς ἐλαφρᾶς ἡλικίας ὡπλισμένους κουφοτέροις ὅπλοις καὶ τὰ προκείμενα τῆς χώρας ὄρη κατέχοντας βλαβεροὺς μὲν τοῖς πολεμίοις εἶναι, μεγάλην δὲ προβολὴν τοῖς πολίταις τῆς χώρας κατεσκευάσθαι;  
And don’t you think that active young Athenians, more lightly armed and occupying the mountains that protect our country, would prove a thorn in the side of the enemy and a strong bulwark of defence to our people?

1172	καὶ ὁ Περικλῆς, πάντ’ οἶμαι, ἔφη, ὦ Σωκράτες, καὶ ταῦτα χρήσιμα εἶναι.  
Pericles replied, I think all these suggestions too have a practical value.

1173	εἰ τοίνυν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἀρέσκει σοι ταῦτα, ἐπιχείρει αὐτοῖς, ὦ ἄριστε·  
Then, since you like them, adopt them, my good fellow.

1174	ὅ τι μὲν γὰρ ἂν τούτων καταπράξῃς, καὶ σοὶ καλὸν ἔσται καὶ τῇ πόλει ἀγαθόν, ἐὰν δέ τι αὐτῶν ἀδυνατῇς, οὔτε τὴν πόλιν βλάψεις οὔτε σαυτὸν καταισχυνεῖς.  
Any part of them that you carry out will bring honour to you and good to the state; and should you fail in part, you will neither harm the state nor disgrace yourself.

1175	Γλαύκωνα δὲ τὸν Ἀρίστωνος, ὅτ’ ἐπεχείρει δημηγορεῖν, ἐπιθυμῶν προστατεύειν τῆς πόλεως οὐδέπω εἴκοσιν ἔτη γεγονώς, τῶν ἄλλων οἰκείων τε καὶ φίλων οὐδεὶς ἐδύνατο παῦσαι ἑλκόμενόν τε ἀπὸ τοῦ βήματος καὶ καταγέλαστον ὄντα·  
Ariston’s son, Glaucon, was attempting to become an orator and striving for headship in the state, though he was less than twenty years old; and none of his friends or relations could check him, though he would get himself dragged from the platform and make himself a laughing-stock.

1176	Σωκράτης δέ, εὔνους ὢν αὐτῷ διά τε Χαρμίδην τὸν Γλαύκωνος καὶ διὰ Πλάτωνα, μόνος ἔπαυσεν.  
Only Socrates, who took an interest in him for the sake of Plato and Glaucon’s son Charmides, managed to check him.

1177	ἐντυχὼν γὰρ αὐτῷ πρῶτον μὲν εἰς τὸ ἐθελῆσαι ἀκούειν τοιάδε λέξας κατέσχεν, ὦ Γλαύκων, ἔφη, προστατεύειν ἡμῖν διανενόησαι τῆς πόλεως;  
For once on meeting him, he stopped him and contrived to engage his attention by saying: “Glaucon, have you made up your mind to be our chief man in the state?”

1178	ἔγωγ’, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες.  
“I have, Socrates.”

1179	νὴ Δί’, ἔφη, καλὸν γάρ, εἴπερ τι καὶ ἄλλο τῶν ἐν ἀνθρώποις.  
“Well, upon my word there’s no more honourable ambition in the world;

1180	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι, ἐὰν τοῦτο διαπράξῃ, δυνατὸς μὲν ἔσει αὐτὸς τυγχάνειν ὅτου ἂν ἐπιθυμῇς, ἱκανὸς δὲ τοὺς φίλους ὠφελεῖν, ἐπαρεῖς δὲ τὸν πατρῷον οἶκον, αὐξήσεις δὲ τὴν πατρίδα, ὀνομαστὸς δ’ ἔσει πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ πόλει, ἔπειτα ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι, ἴσως δ’, ὥσπερ Θεμιστοκλῆς, καὶ ἐν τοῖς βαρβάροις.”  
for obviously, if you gain your object, you will be able to get whatever you want, and you will have the means of helping your friends: you will lift up your father’s house and exalt your fatherland; and you will make a name for yourself first at home, later on in Greece, and possibly, like Themistocles, in foreign lands as well; wherever you go, you will be a man of mark.”

1181	ὅπου δ’ ἂν ᾖς, πανταχοῦ περίβλεπτος ἔσει.  
Wherever you go, you will be a man of mark.

1182	ταῦτ’ οὖν ἀκούων ὁ Γλαύκων ἐμεγαλύνετο καὶ ἡδέως παρέμενε.  
When Glaucon heard this, he felt proud and gladly lingered.

1183	μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ὁ Σωκράτης, οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, τοῦτο μέν, ὦ Γλαύκων, δῆλον, ὅτι, εἴπερ τιμᾶσθαι βούλει, ὠφελητέα σοι ἡ πόλις ἐστί;  
Next Socrates asked, "Well, Glaucon, as you want to win honour, is it not obvious that you must benefit your city?"

1184	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.  
"Most certainly," he replied.

1185	πρὸς θεῶν, ἔφη, μὴ τοίνυν ἀποκρύψῃ, ἀλλ’ εἶπον ἡμῖν ἐκ τίνος ἄρξῃ τὴν πόλιν εὐεργετεῖν.  
"Pray don’t be reticent, then; but tell us how you propose to begin your services to the state."

1186	ἐπεὶ δὲ ὁ Γλαύκων διεσιώπησεν, ὡς ἂν τότε σκοπῶν ὁπόθεν ἄρχοιτο, ἆρ’ ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ὥσπερ φίλου οἶκον εἰ αὐξῆσαι βούλοιο, πλουσιώτερον αὐτὸν ἐπιχειροίης ἂν ποιεῖν, οὕτω καὶ τὴν πόλιν πειράσῃ πλουσιωτέραν ποιῆσαι;  
As Glaucon remained dumb, apparently considering for the first time how to begin, Socrates said, "If you wanted to add to a friend’s fortune, you would set about making him richer. Will you try, then, to make your city richer?"

1187	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.  
"Certainly," he said.

1188	οὐκοῦν πλουσιωτέρα γ’ ἂν εἴη προσόδων αὐτῇ πλειόνων γενομένων;  
"Would she not be richer if she had a larger revenue?"

1189	εἰκὸς γοῦν, ἔφη.  
"Oh yes, presumably," he replied.

1190	λέξον δή, ἔφη, ἐκ τίνων νῦν αἱ πρόσοδοι τῇ πόλει καὶ πόσαι τινές εἰσι;  
"Now tell me, from what sources are the city’s revenues at present derived and what is their total?"

1191	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι ἔσκεψαι, ἵνα, εἰ μέν τινες αὐτῶν ἐνδεῶς ἔχουσιν, ἐκπληρώσῃς, εἰ δὲ παραλείπονται, προσπορίσῃς.  
"No doubt you have gone into this matter, in order to raise the amount of any that are deficient and supply any that are lacking."

1192	ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, ταῦτά γε οὐκ ἐπέσκεμμαι.  
"Certainly not," exclaimed Glaucon, "I haven’t gone into that."

1193	ἀλλ’ εἰ τοῦτο, ἔφη, παρέλιπες, τάς γε δαπάνας τῆς πόλεως ἡμῖν εἰπέ·  
"Well, if you have left that out, tell us the expenditure of the city."

1194	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι καὶ τούτων τὰς περιττὰς ἀφαιρεῖν διανοῇ.  
"No doubt you intend to cut down any items that are excessive."

1195	ἀλλὰ μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, οὐδὲ πρὸς ταῦτά πω ἐσχόλασα.  
"The fact is, I haven’t had time yet for that either."

1196	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, τὸ μὲν πλουσιωτέραν τὴν πόλιν ποιεῖν ἀναβαλούμεθα·  
"Oh, then we will postpone the business of making the city richer;"

1197	πῶς γὰρ οἷόν τε μὴ εἰδότα γε τὰ ἀναλώματα καὶ τὰς προσόδους ἐπιμεληθῆναι τούτων;  
"for how is it possible to look after income and expenditure without knowing what they are?"

1198	ἀλλ’, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, δυνατόν ἐστι καὶ ἀπὸ πολεμίων τὴν πόλιν πλουτίζειν.  
"Well, Socrates, one can make our enemies contribute to the city’s wealth."

1199	νὴ Δία σφόδρα γ’, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐάν τις αὐτῶν κρείττων ᾖ·  
"Yes, of course, provided he is stronger than they;"

1200	ἥττων δὲ ὢν καὶ τὰ ὄντα προσαποβάλοι ἄν.  
"but if he be weaker, he may lose what she has got instead."

1201	ἀληθῆ λέγεις, ἔφη.  
"True," he said.

1193	ἀλλ’ εἰ τοῦτο, ἔφη, παρέλιπες, τάς γε δαπάνας τῆς πόλεως ἡμῖν εἰπέ·  
"Well, if you have left that out, tell us the expenditure of the city."

1194	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι καὶ τούτων τὰς περιττὰς ἀφαιρεῖν διανοῇ.  
"No doubt you intend to cut down any items that are excessive."

1195	ἀλλὰ μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, οὐδὲ πρὸς ταῦτά πω ἐσχόλασα.  
"The fact is, I haven’t had time yet for that either."

1196	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, τὸ μὲν πλουσιωτέραν τὴν πόλιν ποιεῖν ἀναβαλούμεθα·  
"Oh, then we will postpone the business of making the city richer;"

1197	πῶς γὰρ οἷόν τε μὴ εἰδότα γε τὰ ἀναλώματα καὶ τὰς προσόδους ἐπιμεληθῆναι τούτων;  
"for how is it possible to look after income and expenditure without knowing what they are?"

1198	ἀλλ’, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, δυνατόν ἐστι καὶ ἀπὸ πολεμίων τὴν πόλιν πλουτίζειν.  
"Well, Socrates, one can make our enemies contribute to the city’s wealth."

1199	νὴ Δία σφόδρα γ’, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐάν τις αὐτῶν κρείττων ᾖ·  
"Yes, of course, provided he is stronger than they;"

1200	ἥττων δὲ ὢν καὶ τὰ ὄντα προσαποβάλοι ἄν.  
"but if he be weaker, he may lose what she has got instead."

1201	ἀληθῆ λέγεις, ἔφη.  
"True," he said.

1202	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, τόν γε βουλευσόμενον, πρὸς οὕστινας δεῖ πολεμεῖν, τήν τε τῆς πόλεως δύναμιν καὶ τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων εἰδέναι δεῖ, ἵνα, ἐὰν μὲν ἡ τῆς πόλεως κρείττων ᾖ, συμβουλεύῃ ἐπιχειρεῖν τῷ πολέμῳ, ἐὰν δὲ ἥττων τῶν ἐναντίων, εὐλαβεῖσθαι πείθῃ.  
"There

fore, in order to advise her whom to fight, it is necessary to know the strength of the city and of the enemy, so that, if the city be stronger, one may recommend her to go to war, but if weaker than the enemy, may persuade her to beware."

1203	ὀρθῶς λέγεις, ἔφη.  
"You are right," he said.

1204	πρῶτον μὲν τοίνυν, ἔφη, λέξον ἡμῖν τῆς πόλεως τήν τε πεζικὴν καὶ τὴν ναυτικὴν δύναμιν, εἶτα τὴν τῶν ἐναντίων.  
"First, then, tell us the naval and military strength of our city, and then that of her enemies."

1205	ἀλλὰ μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, οὐκ ἂν ἔχοιμί σοι οὕτω γε ἀπὸ στόματος εἰπεῖν.  
"No, of course I can’t tell you out of my head."

1206	ἀλλ’ εἰ γέγραπταί σοι, ἔνεγκε, ἔφη·  
"Well, if you have made notes, fetch them, for I should greatly like to hear this."

1207	πάνυ γὰρ ἡδέως ἂν τοῦτο ἀκούσαιμι.  
"I would very much like to hear that."

1208	ἀλλὰ μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, οὐδὲ γέγραπταί μοί πω.  
"But, I tell you, I haven’t yet made any notes either."

1209	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, καὶ περὶ πολέμου συμβουλεύειν τήν γε πρώτην ἐπισχήσομεν·  
"Then we will postpone offering advice about war too for the present."

1210	ἴσως γὰρ καὶ διὰ τὸ μέγεθος αὐτῶν ἄρτι ἀρχόμενος τῆς προστατείας οὔπω ἐξήτακας.  
"Perhaps because of their complexity, you have not yet investigated these major issues, being new to power."

1211	ἀλλά τοι περί γε φυλακῆς τῆς χώρας οἶδ’ ὅτι ἤδη σοι μεμέληκε, καὶ οἶσθα ὁπόσαι τε φυλακαὶ ἐπίκαιροί εἰσι καὶ ὁπόσαι μή, καὶ ὁπόσοι τε φρουροὶ ἱκανοί εἰσι καὶ ὁπόσοι μή εἰσι·  
"But the defence of the country, now, I feel sure you have thought about that, and know how many of the garrisons are well placed and how many are not, and how many of the guards are efficient and how many are not;"

1212	καὶ τὰς μὲν ἐπικαίρους φυλακὰς συμβουλεύσεις μείζονας ποιεῖν, τὰς δὲ περιττὰς ἀφαιρεῖν.  
"and you will propose to strengthen the well-placed garrisons and to do away with those that are superfluous."

1213	νὴ Δί’, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, ἁπάσας μὲν οὖν ἔγωγε, ἕνεκά γε τοῦ οὕτως αὐτὰς φυλάττεσθαι ὥστε κλέπτεσθαι τὰ ἐκ τῆς χώρας.  
"No, no; I shall propose to do away with them all, for the only effect of maintaining them is that our crops are stolen."

1214	ἐὰν δέ τις ἀφέλῃ γ’, ἔφη, τὰς φυλακάς, οὐκ οἴει καὶ ἁρπάζειν ἐξουσίαν ἔσεσθαι τῷ βουλομένῳ;  
"But if you do away with the garrisons, don’t you think that anyone will be at liberty to rob us openly?"

1215	ἀτάρ, ἔφη, πότερον ἐλθὼν αὐτὸς ἐξήτακας τοῦτο, ἢ πῶς οἶσθα ὅτι κακῶς φυλάττονται;  
"However, have you been on a tour of inspection, or how do you know that they are badly maintained?"

1216	εἰκάζω, ἔφη.  
"By guess-work," he said.

1217	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, καὶ περὶ τούτων, ὅταν μηκέτι εἰκάζωμεν, ἀλλ’ ἤδη εἰδῶμεν, τότε συμβουλεύσομεν;  
"Then shall we wait to offer advice on this question too until we really know, instead of merely guessing?"

1218	ἴσως, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, βέλτιον.  
"Perhaps it would be better," he said.

1219	εἴς γε μήν, ἔφη, τ- ἀργύρεια

 οἶδ’ ὅτι οὐκ ἀφῖξαι, ὥστ’ ἔχειν εἰπεῖν δι’ ὅ τι νῦν ἐλάττω ἢ πρόσθεν προσέρχεται αὐτόθεν.  
"Now for the silver mines. I am sure you have not visited them, and so cannot tell why the amount derived from them has fallen."

1220	οὐ γὰρ οὖν ἐλήλυθα, ἔφη.  
"No, indeed, I have not been there," he said.

1221	καὶ γὰρ νὴ Δί’, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, λέγεται βαρὺ τὸ χωρίον εἶναι, ὥστε, ὅταν περὶ τούτου δέῃ συμβουλεύειν, αὕτη σοι ἡ πρόφασις ἀρκέσει.  
"To be sure: the district is considered unhealthy, and so when you have to offer advice on the problem, this excuse will serve."

1222	σκώπτομαι, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων.  
"You’re chaffing me," he said.

1223	ἀλλ’ ἐκείνου γέ τοι, ἔφη, οἶδ’ ὅτι οὐκ ἠμέληκας, ἀλλ’ ἔσκεψαι, πόσον χρόνον ἱκανός ἐστιν ὁ ἐκ τῆς χώρας γιγνόμενος σῖτος διατρέφειν τὴν πόλιν, καὶ πόσου εἰς τὸν ἐνιαυτὸν προσδεῖται, ἵνα μὴ τοῦτό γε λάθῃ σέ ποτε ἡ πόλις ἐνδεὴς γενομένη, ἀλλ’ εἰδὼς ἔχῃς ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀναγκαίων συμβουλεύων τῇ πόλει βοηθεῖν τε καὶ σῴζειν αὐτήν.  
"Ah, but there’s one problem I feel sure you haven’t overlooked: no doubt you have reckoned how long the corn grown in the country will maintain the population, and how much is needed annually, so that you may not be caught napping, should the city at any time be short, and may come to the rescue and relieve the city by giving expert advice about food."

1224	λέγεις, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, παμμέγεθες πρᾶγμα, εἴ γε καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δεήσει.  
"What an overwhelming task, if one has got to include such things as that in one’s duties!"

1225	ἀλλὰ μέντοι, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, οὐδ’ ἂν τὸν ἑαυτοῦ ποτε οἶκον καλῶς τις οἰκήσειεν, εἰ μὴ πάντα μὲν εἴσεται ὧν προσδεῖται, πάντων δὲ ἐπιμελόμενος ἐκπληρώσει.  
"But, you know, no one will ever manage even his own household successfully unless he knows all its needs and sees that they are all supplied."

1226	ἀλλ’ ἐπεὶ ἡ μὲν πόλις ἐκ πλειόνων ἢ μυρίων οἰκιῶν συνέστηκε, χαλεπὸν δ’ ἐστὶν ἅμα τοσούτων οἴκων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, πῶς οὐχ ἕνα τὸν τοῦ θείου πρῶτον ἐπειράθης αὐξῆσαι;  
"Seeing that our city contains more than ten thousand houses, and it is difficult to look after so many families at once, you must have tried to make a start by doing something for one, I mean your uncle’s?"

1227	δεῖται δέ.  
"It needs it;"

1228	κἂν μὲν τοῦτον δύνῃ, καὶ πλείοσιν ἐπιχειρήσεις·  
"and if you succeed with that one, you can set to work on a larger number."

1229	ἕνα δὲ μὴ δυνάμενος ὠφελῆσαι πῶς ἂν πολλούς γε δυνηθείης;  
"But if you can’t do anything for one, how are you going to succeed with many?"

1230	ὥσπερ, εἴ τις ἓν τάλαντον μὴ δύναιτο φέρειν, πῶς οὐ φανερὸν ὅτι πλείω γε φέρειν οὐδ’ ἐπιχειρητέον αὐτῷ;  
"If a man can’t carry one talent, it’s absurd for him to try to carry more than one, isn’t it?"

1231	ἀλλ’ ἔγωγ’, ἔφη ὁ Γλαύκων, ὠφελοίην ἂν τὸν τοῦ θείου οἶκον, εἴ μοι ἐθέλοι πείθεσθαι.  
"Well, I could do something for uncle’s household if only he would listen to me."

1232	εἶτα, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, τὸν θεῖον οὐ δυνάμενος πεῖσαι, Ἀθηναίους πάντας μετὰ τοῦ θείου νομίζεις δυνήσεσθαι ποιῆσαι πείθεσθαί σοι;  
"What? You can’t persuade your uncle, and yet you suppose you will be able to persuade all the Athenians, including your uncle, to listen to you?"

1233 φυλάττου, ἔφη, ὦ Γλαύκων, ὅπως μὴ τοῦ εὐδοξεῖν ἐπιθυμῶν εἰς τ- ἐναντίον ἔλθῃς.
"Pray take care, Glaucon, that your daring ambition doesn’t lead to a fall! Don’t you see how risky it is to say or do what you don’t understand?"

1234 ἢ οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὡς σφαλερόν ἐστι τό, ἃ μὴ οἶδέ τις, ταῦτα ἢ λέγειν ἢ πράττειν;
"Don’t you see how risky it is to say or do what you don’t understand?"

1235 ἐνθυμοῦ δὲ τῶν ἄλλων, ὅσους οἶσθα τοιούτους, οἷοι φαίνονται καὶ λέγοντες ἃ μὴ ἴσασι καὶ πράττοντες, πότερά σοι δοκοῦσιν ἐπὶ τοῖς τοιούτοις ἐπαίνου μᾶλλον ἢ ψόγου τυγχάνειν καὶ πότερον θαυμάζεσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ καταφρονεῖσθαι;
"Think of others whom you know to be the sort of men who say and do what they obviously don’t understand. Do you think they get praise or blame by it?"

1236 ἐνθυμοῦ δὲ καὶ τῶν εἰδότων ὅ τι τε λέγουσι καὶ ὅ τι ποιοῦσι;
"And think of those who understand what they say and what they do."

1237 καί, ὡς ἐγὼ νομίζω, εὑρήσεις ἐν πᾶσιν ἔργοις τοὺς μὲν εὐδοκιμοῦντάς τε καὶ θαυμαζομένους ἐκ τῶν μάλιστα ἐπισταμένων ὄντας, τοὺς δὲ κακοδοξοῦντάς τε καὶ καταφρονουμένους ἐκ τῶν ἀμαθεστάτων.
"You will find, I take it, that the men who are famous and admired always come from those who have the widest knowledge, and the infamous and despised from the most ignorant."

1238 εἰ οὖν ἐπιθυμεῖς εὐδοκιμεῖν τε καὶ θαυμάζεσθαι ἐν τῇ πόλει, πειρῶ κατεργάσασθαι ὡς μάλιστα τὸ εἰδέναι ἃ βούλει πράττειν.
"Therefore, if you want to win fame and admiration in public life, try to get a thorough knowledge of what you propose to do."

1239 ἐὰν γὰρ τούτῳ διενέγκας τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιχειρῇς τὰ τῆς πόλεως πράττειν, οὐκ ἂν θαυμάσαιμι εἰ πάνυ ῥᾳδίως τύχοις ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖς.
"If you enter on a public career with this advantage over others, I should not be surprised if you gained the object of your ambition quite easily."

1240	Χαρμίδην δὲ τὸν Γλαύκωνος ὁρῶν ἀξιόλογον μὲν ἄνδρα ὄντα καὶ πολλῷ δυνατώτερον τῶν τὰ πολιτικὰ τότε πραττόντων , ὀκνοῦντα δὲ προσιέναι τῷ δήμῳ καὶ τῶν τῆς πόλεως πραγμάτων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι , εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Χαρμίδη , εἴ τις ἱκανὸς ὢν τοὺς στεφανίτας ἀγῶνας νικᾶν καὶ διὰ τοῦτο αὐτός τε τιμᾶσθαι καὶ τὴν πατρίδα ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι εὐδοκιμωτέραν ποιεῖν μὴ θέλοι ἀγωνίζεσθαι , ποῖόν τινα τοῦτον νομίζοις ἂν τὸν ἄνδρα εἶναι ;
Seeing that Glaucon’s son, Charmides, was a respectable man and far more capable than the politicians of the day, and nevertheless shrank from speaking in the assembly and taking a part in politics, he said: "Tell me, Charmides, what would you think of a man who was capable of gaining a victory in the great games and consequently of winning honour for himself and adding to his country’s fame in the Greek world, and yet refused to compete?" 

1241	δῆλον ὅτι , ἔφη , μαλακόν τε καὶ δειλόν .
"I should think him a poltroon and a coward, of course."

1242 εἰ δέ τις, ἔφη, δυνατὸς ὢν τῶν τῆς πόλεως πραγμάτων ἐπιμελόμενος τήν τε πόλιν αὔξειν καὶ αὐτὸς διὰ τοῦτο τιμᾶσθαι, ὀκνοίη δὴ τοῦτο πράττειν, οὐκ ἂν εἰκότως δειλὸς νομίζοιτο;
"Then if a man were to shrink from state business though capable of discharging it with advantage to the state and honour to himself, wouldn’t it be reasonable to think him a coward?"

1243 ἴσως, ἔφη;
"Perhaps," he said.

1244 ἀτὰρ πρὸς τί με ταῦτ’ ἐρωτᾷς;
"But why do you ask me that?"

1245 ὅτι, ἔφη, οἶμαί σε δυνατὸν ὄντα ὀκνεῖν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι, καὶ ταῦτα ὧν ἀνάγκη σοι μετέχειν πολίτῃ γε ὄντι.
"Because I fancy that you shrink from work that is within your powers, work in which it is your duty as a citizen to take a hand."

1246 τὴν δὲ ἐμὴν δύναμιν, ἔφη ὁ Χαρμίδης, ἐν ποίῳ ἔργῳ καταμαθὼν ταῦτά μου καταγιγνώσκεις;
"In what sort of work have you discovered my powers?" asked Charmides.

1247 ἐν ταῖς συνουσίαις, ἔφη, αἷς σύνει τοῖς τὰ τῆς πόλεως πράττουσι;
"In your intercourse with public men. Whenever they take counsel with you, I find that you give excellent advice, and whenever they make a mistake, your criticism is sound," he replied.

1248 καὶ γὰρ ὅταν τι ἀνακοινῶνταί σοι, ὁρῶ σε καλῶς συμβουλεύοντα, καὶ ὅταν τι ἁμαρτάνωσιν, ὀρθῶς ἐπιτιμῶντα.
"Whenever they take counsel with you, I find that you give excellent advice, and whenever they make a mistake, your criticism is sound."

1249 οὐ τ- αὐτόν ἐστιν, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἰδίᾳ τε διαλέγεσθαι καὶ ἐν τῷ πλήθει ἀγωνίζεσθαι.
"A private conversation is a very different thing from a crowded debate, Socrates."

1250 καὶ μήν, ἔφη, ὅ γε ἀριθμεῖν δυνάμενος οὐδὲν ἧττον ἐν τῷ πλήθει ἢ μόνος ἀριθμεῖ, καὶ οἱ κατὰ μόνας ἄριστα κιθαρίζοντες οὗτοι καὶ ἐν τῷ πλήθει κρατιστεύουσιν.
"But, you know, a man who is good at figures counts as well in a crowd as in solitude; and those who play the harp best in private excel no less in a crowd."

1251 αἰδῶ δὲ καὶ φόβον, ἔφη, οὐχ ὁρᾷς ἔμφυτά τε ἀνθρώποις ὄντα καὶ πολλῷ μᾶλλον ἐν τοῖς ὄχλοις ἢ ἐν ταῖς ἰδίαις ὁμιλίαις παριστάμενα;
"But surely you see that bashfulness and timidity come natural to a man, and affect him far more powerfully in the presence of a multitude than in private society?"

1252 καὶ σέ γε διδάξων, ἔφη, ὥρμημαι ·
"Yes, and I mean to give you a lesson," he said.

1253 οὔτε τοὺς φρονιμωτάτους αἰδούμενος οὔτε τοὺς ἰσχυροτάτους φοβούμενος ἐν τοῖς ἀφρονεστάτοις τε καὶ ἀσθενεστάτοις αἰσχύνει λέγειν.
"The wisest do not make you bashful, and the strongest do not make you timid; yet you are ashamed to address an audience of mere dunces and weaklings."

1254 πότερον γὰρ τοὺς γναφέας αὐτῶν ἢ τοὺς σκυτέας ἢ τοὺς τέκτονας ἢ τοὺς χαλκέας ἢ τοὺς γεωργοὺς ἢ τοὺς ἐμπόρους ἢ τοὺς ἐν τῇ ἀγορῷ μεταβαλλομένους καὶ φροντίζοντας ὅ τι ἐλάττονος πριάμενοι πλείονος ἀποδῶνται αἰσχύνει;
"Who are they that make you ashamed? The fullers or the cobblers or the builders or the smiths or the farmers or the merchants, or the traffickers in the market-place who think of nothing but buying cheap and selling dear? For these are the people who make up the Assembly."

1255 ἐκ γὰρ τούτων ἁπάντων ἡ ἐκκλησία συνίσταται.
"For these are the people who make up the Assembly."

1256 τί δὲ οἴει διαφέρειν ὃ σὺ ποιεῖς ἢ τῶν ἀσκητῶν ὄντα κρείττω τοὺς ἰδιώτας φοβεῖσθαι;
"You behave like a man who can beat trained athletes and is afraid of amateurs!"

1257 σὺ γὰρ τοῖς πρωτεύουσιν ἐν τῇ πόλει, ὧν ἔνιοι καταφρονοῦσί σου, ῥᾳδίως διαλεγόμενος καὶ τῶν ἐπιμελομένων τοῦ τῇ πόλει διαλέγεσθαι πολὺ περιών, ἐν τοῖς μηδεπώποτε φροντίσασι τῶν πολιτικῶν μηδὲ σοῦ καταπεφρονηκόσιν ὀκνεῖς λέγειν, δεδιὼς μὴ καταγελασθῇς.
"You are at your ease when you talk with the first men in the state, some of whom despise you, and you are a far better talker than the ordinary run of politicians; and yet you are shy of addressing men who never gave a thought to public affairs and haven’t learnt to despise you — all because you fear ridicule!"

1267	Ἀριστίππου δὲ ἐπιχειροῦντος ἐλέγχειν τὸν Σωκράτην , ὥσπερ αὐτὸς ὑπ’ ἐκείνου τὸ πρότερον ἠλέγχετο , βουλόμενος τοὺς συνόντας ὠφελεῖν ὁ Σωκράτης ἀπεκρίνατο οὐχ ὥσπερ οἱ φυλαττόμενοι μή πῃ ὁ λόγος ἐπαλλαχθῇ , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἂν πεπεισμένοι μάλιστα πράττειν τὰ δέοντα .
When Aristippus attempted to cross-examine Socrates in the same fashion as he had been cross-examined by him in their previous encounter, Socrates, wishing to benefit his companions, answered like a man who is resolved to do what is right, and not like a debater guarding against any distortion of the argument.

1267	Ἀριστίππου δὲ ἐπιχειροῦντος ἐλέγχειν τὸν Σωκράτην , ὥσπερ αὐτὸς ὑπ’ ἐκείνου τὸ πρότερον ἠλέγχετο , βουλόμενος τοὺς συνόντας ὠφελεῖν ὁ Σωκράτης ἀπεκρίνατο οὐχ ὥσπερ οἱ φυλαττόμενοι μή πῃ ὁ λόγος ἐπαλλαχθῇ , ἀλλ’ ὡς ἂν πεπεισμένοι μάλιστα πράττειν τὰ δέοντα .
When Aristippus attempted to cross-examine <persName><surname>Socrates</surname></persName> in the same fashion as he had been cross-examined by him in their previous encounter,
<persName><surname>Socrates</surname></persName>, wishing to benefit his companions, answered like a man who is resolved to do what is right, and not like a debater guarding against any distortion of the argument.

1268    ὁ μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸν ἤρετο εἴ τι εἰδείη ἀγαθόν , ἵνα , εἴ τι εἴποι τῶν τοιούτων , οἷον ἢ σιτίον ἢ ποτὸν ἢ χρήματα ἢ ὑγίειαν ἢ ῥώμην ἢ τόλμαν , δεικνύοι δὴ τοῦτο κακὸν ἐνίοτε ὄν.
Aristippus asked if he knew of anything good, in order that if Socrates mentioned some good thing, such as food, drink, money, health, strength, or daring, he might show that it is sometimes bad.

1269    ὁ δὲ εἰδὼς ὅτι , ἐάν τι ἐνοχλῇ ἡμᾶς , δεόμεθα τοῦ παύσοντος , ἀπεκρίνατο ᾗπερ καὶ ποιεῖν κράτιστον , ἆρά γε , ἔφη , ἐρωτᾷς με , εἴ τι οἶδα πυρετοῦ ἀγαθόν ;
But he, knowing that when anything troubles us we need what will put an end to the trouble, gave the best answer: "Are you asking me," he said, "whether I know of anything good for a fever?"

1270    οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"No, not that," he said.

1271    ἀλλ’ ὀφθαλμίας ;
"For ophthalmia?"

1272    οὐδὲ τοῦτο .
"No, nor that."

1273    ἀλλὰ λιμοῦ ;
"For hunger?"

1274    οὐδὲ λιμοῦ .
"No, not for hunger either."

1275    ἀλλὰ μήν , ἔφη , εἴ γ’ ἐρωτᾷς με εἴ τι ἀγαθὸν οἶδα ὃ μηδενὸς ἀγαθόν ἐστιν , οὔτ’ οἶδα , ἔφη , οὔτε δέομαι .
"Well, but if you are asking me whether I know of anything good in relation to nothing, I neither know nor want to know," he replied.

1276    πάλιν δὲ τοῦ Ἀριστίππου ἐρωτῶντος αὐτὸν εἴ τι εἰδείη καλόν , καὶ πολλά , ἔφη .
Again Aristippus asked him whether he knew of anything beautiful: "Yes, many things," he replied.

1277    ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , πάντα ὅμοια ἀλλήλοις ;
"All like one another?" he asked.

1278    ὡς οἷόν τε μὲν οὖν , ἔφη , ἀνομοιότατα ἔνια .
"On the contrary, some are as unlike as they can be," he answered.

1279    πῶς οὖν , ἔφη , τὸ τῷ καλῷ ἀνόμοιον

 καλὸν ἂν εἴη ;
"How then can that which is unlike the beautiful be beautiful?" he asked.

1280    ὅτι νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ἔστι μὲν τῷ καλῷ πρὸς δρόμον ἀνθρώπῳ ἄλλος ἀνόμοιος καλὸς πρὸς πάλην , ἔστι δὲ ἀσπὶς καλὴ πρὸς τὸ προβάλλεσθαι ὡς ἔνι ἀνομοιοτάτη τῷ ἀκοντίῳ , καλῷ πρὸς τὸ σφόδρα τε καὶ ταχὺ φέρεσθαι .
"The reason, of course, is that a beautiful wrestler is unlike a beautiful runner, a shield beautiful for defence is utterly unlike a javelin beautiful for swift and powerful hurling," he explained.

1281    οὐδὲν διαφερόντως , ἔφη , ἀποκρίνῃ μοι ἢ ὅτε σε ἠρώτησα εἴ τι ἀγαθὸν εἰδείης .
"That is the same answer as you gave to my question whether you knew of anything good," he said.

1282    σὺ δ’ οἴει , ἔφη , ἄλλο μὲν ἀγαθόν , ἄλλο δὲ καλὸν εἶναι ;
"You think, do you, that good is one thing and beautiful another?" he asked.

1283    οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι πρὸς τ- αὐτὰ πάντα καλά τε κ- ἀγαθά ἐστι ;
"Don’t you know that all things are both beautiful and good in relation to the same things?"

1284    πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἡ ἀρετὴ οὐ πρὸς ἄλλα μὲν ἀγαθόν , πρὸς ἄλλα δὲ καλόν ἐστιν , ἔπειτα οἱ ἄνθρωποι τὸ αὐτό τε καὶ πρὸς τὰ αὐτὰ καλοί τε κ- ἀγαθοὶ λέγονται , πρὸς τὰ αὐτὰ δὲ καὶ τὰ σώματα τῶν ἀνθρώπων καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ φαίνεται , πρὸς τ- αὐτὰ δὲ καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα οἷς ἄνθρωποι χρῶνται καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ νομίζεται , πρὸς ἅπερ ἂν εὔχρηστα ᾖ .
"In the first place, Virtue is not a good thing in relation to some things and a beautiful thing in relation to others. Men, again, are called 'beautiful and good' in the same respect and in relation to the same things: it is in relation to the same things that men’s bodies look beautiful and good and that all other things men use are thought beautiful and good, namely, in relation to those things for which they are useful."

1285    ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , καὶ κόφινος κοπροφόρος καλόν ἐστι ;
"Is a dung basket beautiful then?" he asked.

1286    νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , καὶ χρυσῆ γε ἀσπὶς αἰσχρόν , ἐὰν πρὸς τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἔργα ὁ μὲν καλῶς πεποιημένος ᾖ , ἡ δὲ κακῶς .
"Of course, and a golden shield is ugly, if the one is well made for its special work and the other badly," he replied.

1287    λέγεις σύ , ἔφη , καλά τε καὶ αἰσχρὰ τὰ αὐτ

ὰ εἶναι ;
"Do you mean that the same things are both beautiful and ugly?" he asked.

1288    καὶ νὴ Δί’ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη , ἀγαθά τε καὶ κακά ·
"Of course — and both good and bad," he answered.

1289    πολλάκις γὰρ τό γε λιμοῦ ἀγαθὸν πυρετοῦ κακόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ πυρετοῦ ἀγαθὸν λιμοῦ κακόν ἐστι ·
"For what is good for hunger is often bad for fever, and what is good for fever bad for hunger," he explained.

1290    πολλάκις δὲ τὸ μὲν πρὸς δρόμον καλὸν πρὸς πάλην αἰσχρόν , τὸ δὲ πρὸς πάλην καλὸν πρὸς δρόμον αἰσχρόν ·
"what is beautiful for running is often ugly for wrestling, and what is beautiful for wrestling ugly for running," he added.

1291    πάντα γὰρ ἀγαθὰ μὲν καὶ καλά ἐστι πρὸς ἃ ἂν εὖ ἔχῃ , κακὰ δὲ καὶ αἰσχρὰ πρὸς ἃ ἂν κακῶς .
"For all things are good and beautiful in relation to those purposes for which they are well adapted, bad and ugly in relation to those for which they are ill adapted," he concluded.

1292    καὶ οἰκίας δὲ λέγων τὰς αὐτὰς καλάς τε εἶναι καὶ χρησίμους παιδεύειν ἔμοιγ’ ἐδόκει , οἵας χρή , οἰκοδομεῖσθαι .
Again his dictum about houses, that the same house is both beautiful and useful, was a lesson in the art of building houses as they ought to be.

1293    ἐπεσκόπει δὲ ὧδε ·
He approached the problem thus:

1294    ἆρά γε τὸν μέλλοντα οἰκίαν , οἵαν χρή , ἔχειν τοῦτο δεῖ μηχανᾶσθαι , ὅπως ἡδίστη τε ἐνδιαιτᾶσθαι καὶ χρησιμωτάτη ἔσται ;
"When one means to have the right sort of house, must he contrive to make it as pleasant to live in and as useful as can be?" he asked.

1295    τούτου δὲ ὁμολογουμένου , οὐκοῦν ἡδὺ μὲν θέρους ψυχεινὴν ἔχειν , ἡδὺ δὲ χειμῶνος ἀλεεινήν ;
And this being admitted, "Is it pleasant," he asked, "to have it cool in summer and warm in winter?"

1296    ἐπειδὴ δὲ καὶ τοῦτο συμφαῖεν , οὐκοῦν ἐν ταῖς πρὸς μεσημβρίαν βλεπούσαις οἰκίαις τοῦ μὲν χειμῶνος ὁ ἥλιος εἰς τὰς παστάδας ὑπολάμπει , τοῦ δὲ θέρους ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν αὐτῶν καὶ τῶν στεγῶν πορευόμενος σκιὰν παρέχει .
And when they agreed with this also, "Now in houses with a south aspect, the sun’s rays penetrate into the porticoes in winter, but in summer the path of the sun is right over our heads and above the roof, so that there is shade," he said.

1297    οὐκοῦν , εἴ γε καλῶς ἔχει ταῦτα οὕτω γίγνεσθαι , οἰκοδομεῖν δεῖ ὑψηλότερα μὲν τὰ πρὸς μεσημβρίαν , ἵνα ὁ χειμερινὸς ἥλιος μὴ ἀποκλείηται , χθαμαλώτερα δὲ τὰ πρὸς ἄρκτον , ἵνα οἱ ψυχροὶ μὴ ἐμπίπτωσιν ἄνεμοι ·


"If, then, this is the best arrangement, we should build the south side loftier to get the winter sun and the north side lower to keep out the cold winds," he instructed.

1298    ὡς δὲ συνελόντι εἰπεῖν , ὅποι πάσας ὥρας αὐτός τε ἂν ἥδιστα καταφεύγοι καὶ τὰ ὄντα ἀσφαλέστατα τιθοῖτο , αὕτη ἂν εἰκότως ἡδίστη τε καὶ καλλίστη οἴκησις εἴη ·
"To put it shortly, the house in which the owner can find a pleasant retreat at all seasons and can store his belongings safely is presumably at once the pleasantest and the most beautiful," he summarized.

1299    γραφαὶ δὲ καὶ ποικιλίαι πλείονας εὐφροσύνας ἀποστεροῦσιν ἢ παρέχουσι .
"As for paintings and decorations, they rob one of more delights than they give," he opined.

1300    ναοῖς γε μὴν καὶ βωμοῖς χώραν ἔφη εἶναι πρεπωδεστάτην ἥτις ἐμφανεστάτη οὖσα ἀστιβεστάτη εἴη ·
"For temples and altars the most suitable position, he said, was a conspicuous site remote from traffic; for it is pleasant to breathe a prayer at the sight of them, and pleasant to approach them filled with holy thoughts."

1302    πάλιν δὲ ἐρωτώμενος ἡ ἀνδρεία πότερον εἴη διδακτὸν ἢ φυσικόν , οἶμαι μέν , ἔφη , ὥσπερ σῶμα σώματος ἰσχυρότερον πρὸς τοὺς πόνους φύεται , οὕτω καὶ ψυχὴν ψυχῆς ἐρρωμενεστέραν πρὸς τὰ δεινὰ φύσει γίγνεσθαι ·
When asked again whether Courage could be taught or came by nature, he replied: "I think that just as one man’s body is naturally stronger than another’s for labour, so one man’s soul is naturally braver than another’s in danger. For I notice that men brought up under the same laws and customs differ widely in daring."

1303    ὁρῶ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς νόμοις τε καὶ ἔθεσι τρεφομένους πολὺ διαφέροντας ἀλλήλων τόλμῃ .
"I see that even those raised under the same laws and customs can vary greatly in their courage."

1304    νομίζω μέντοι πᾶσαν φύσιν μαθήσει καὶ μελέτῃ πρὸς ἀνδρείαν αὔξεσθαι ·
"Nevertheless, I think that every man’s nature acquires more courage by learning and practice."

1305    δῆλον μὲν γὰρ ὅτι Σκύθαι καὶ Θρᾷκες οὐκ ἂν τολμήσειαν ἀσπίδας καὶ δόρατα λαβόντες Λακεδαιμονίοις διαμάχεσθαι ·
"Of course Scythians and Thracians would not dare to take bronze shield and spear and fight Lacedaemonians;"

1306    φανερὸν δ’ ὅτι Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὔτ’ ἂν Θρᾳξὶ πέλταις καὶ ἀκοντίοις οὔτε Σκύθαις τόξοις ἐθέλοιεν ἂν διαγωνίζεσθαι .
"and of course Lacedaemonians would not be willing to face Thracians with leather shields and javelins, nor Scythians with bows for weapons."

1307    ὁρῶ δ’ ἔγωγε καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων πάντων ὁμοίως καὶ φύσει διαφέροντας ἀλλήλων τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ ἐπιμελείᾳ πολὺ ἐπιδιδόντας .
"And similarly in all other points, I find that human beings naturally differ one from another and greatly improve by application."

1308    ἐκ δὲ τούτων δῆλόν ἐστιν ὅτι πάντας

 χρὴ καὶ τοὺς εὐφυεστέρους καὶ τοὺς ἀμβλυτέρους τὴν φύσιν , ἐν οἷς ἂν ἀξιόλογοι βούλωνται γενέσθαι , ταῦτα καὶ μανθάνειν καὶ μελετᾶν .
"Hence it is clear that all men, whatever their natural gifts, the talented and the dullards alike, must learn and practise what they want to excel in."

1309    σοφίαν δὲ καὶ σωφροσύνην οὐ διώριζεν , ἀλλὰ τὸν τὰ μὲν καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ γιγνώσκοντα χρῆσθαι αὐτοῖς καὶ τὸν τὰ αἰσχρὰ εἰδότα εὐλαβεῖσθαι σοφόν τε καὶ σώφρονα ἔκρινε .
Between Wisdom and Prudence he drew no distinction; but if a man knows and practises what is beautiful and good, knows and avoids what is base, that man he judged to be both wise and prudent.

1310    προσερωτώμενος δὲ εἰ τοὺς ἐπισταμένους μὲν ἃ δεῖ πράττειν , ποιοῦντας δὲ τ- ἐναντία σοφούς τε καὶ ἀκρατεῖς εἶναι νομίζοι , οὐδέν γε μᾶλλον , ἔφη , ἢ ἀσόφους τε καὶ ἀκρατεῖς ·
When asked further whether he thought that those who know what they ought to do and yet do the opposite are at once wise and vicious, he answered: "No; not so much that, as both unwise and vicious. For I think that all men have a choice between various courses, and choose and follow the one which they think conduces most to their advantage. Therefore I hold that those who follow the wrong course are neither wise nor prudent."

1311    πάντας γὰρ οἶμαι προαιρουμένους ἐκ τῶν ἐνδεχομένων ἃ οἴονται συμφορώτατα αὑτοῖς εἶναι , ταῦτα πράττειν ·
"I believe that all men choose from among the possible courses the one they think is most beneficial for themselves."

1312    νομίζω οὖν τοὺς μὴ ὀρθῶς πράττοντας οὔτε σοφοὺς οὔτε σώφρονας εἶναι .
"Therefore, I think those who do not act rightly are neither wise nor prudent."

1313    ἔφη δὲ καὶ τὴν δικαιοσύνην καὶ τὴν ἄλλην πᾶσαν ἀρετὴν σοφίαν εἶναι .
He said that Justice and every other form of Virtue is Wisdom.

1314    τά τε γὰρ δίκαια καὶ πάντα ὅσα ἀρετῇ πράττεται καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ εἶναι ·
"For just actions and all forms of virtuous activity are beautiful and good."

1315    καὶ οὔτ’ ἂν τοὺς ταῦτα εἰδότας ἄλλο ἀντὶ τούτων οὐδὲν προελέσθαι οὔτε τοὺς μ

ὴ ἐπισταμένους δύνασθαι πράττειν , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐὰν ἐγχειρῶσιν , ἁμαρτάνειν ·
"He who knows the beautiful and good will never choose anything else, he who is ignorant of them cannot do them, and even if he tries, will fail."

1316    οὕτω καὶ τὰ καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ τοὺς μὲν σοφοὺς πράττειν , τοὺς δὲ μὴ σοφοὺς οὐ δύνασθαι , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐὰν ἐγχειρῶσιν , ἁμαρτάνειν .
"Hence the wise do what is beautiful and good, the unwise cannot and fail if they try."

1317    ἐπεὶ οὖν τά τε δίκαια καὶ τ- ἄλλα καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ πάντα ἀρετῇ πράττεται , δῆλον εἶναι ὅτι καὶ δικαιοσύνη καὶ ἡ ἄλλη πᾶσα ἀρετὴ σοφία ἐστί .
"Therefore, since just actions and all other forms of beautiful and good activity are virtuous actions, it is clear that Justice and every other form of Virtue is Wisdom."

1318    μανίαν γε μὴν ἐναντίον μὲν ἔφη εἶναι σοφίᾳ , οὐ μέντοι γε τὴν ἀνεπιστημοσύνην μανίαν ἐνόμιζε ·
Madness, again, according to him, was the opposite of Wisdom. Nevertheless, he did not identify Ignorance with Madness;

1319    τὸ δὲ ἀγνοεῖν ἑαυτὸν καὶ ἃ μὴ οἶδε δοξάζειν τε καὶ οἴεσθαι γιγνώσκειν ἐγγυτάτω μανίας ἐλογίζετο εἶναι .
but not to know yourself, and to assume and think that you know what you do not, he put next to Madness.

1320    τοὺς μέντοι πολλοὺς ἔφη , ἃ μὲν οἱ πλεῖστοι ἀγνοοῦσι , τοὺς διημαρτηκότας τούτων οὐ φάσκειν μαίνεσθαι , τοὺς δὲ διημαρτηκότας ὧν οἱ πολλοὶ γιγνώσκουσι μαινομένους καλεῖν ·
"Most men, however," he declared, "do not call those mad who err in matters that lie outside the knowledge of ordinary people: madness is the name they give to errors in matters of common knowledge."

1321    ἐάν τε γάρ τις μέγας οὕτως οἴηται εἶναι ὥστε κύπτειν τὰς πύλας τοῦ τείχους διεξιών , ἐάν τε οὕτως ἰσχυρὸς ὥστ’ ἐπιχειρεῖν οἰκίας αἴρεσθαι ἢ ἄλλῳ τῳ ἐπιθέσθαι τῶν πᾶσι δήλων ὅτι ἀδύνατά ἐστι , τοῦτον μαίνεσθαι φάσκειν , τοὺς δὲ μικρὸν διαμαρτάνοντας οὐ δοκεῖν τοῖς πολλοῖς μαίνεσθαι , ἀλλ’ , ὥσπερ τὴν ἰσχυρὰν ἐπιθυμίαν ἔρωτα καλοῦσιν , οὕτω καὶ τὴν μεγάλην παράνοιαν μανίαν αὐτοὺς καλεῖν .
"For instance, if a man imagines himself to be so tall as to stoop when he goes through the gateways in the Wall, or so strong as to try to lift houses or to perform any other feat that everybody knows to be impossible, they say he’s mad. They don’t think a slight error implies madness, but just as they call strong desire love, so they name a great delusion madness."

1322    φθόνον δὲ σκοπῶν , ὅ τι εἴη , λύπην μέν τινα ἐξηύρισκεν αὐτὸν ὄντα , οὔτε μέντοι τὴν ἐπὶ φίλων ἀτυχίαις οὔτε τὴν ἐπ’ ἐχθρῶν εὐτυχίαις γιγνομένην , ἀλλὰ μόνους ἔφη φθονεῖν τοὺς ἐπὶ ταῖς τῶν φίλων εὐπραξίαις ἀνιωμένους .
"Considering the nature of Envy, he found it to be a kind of pain, not, however, at a friend’s misfortune, nor at an enemy’s good fortune, but the envious are those only who are annoyed at their friends’ successes."

1323    θαυμαζόντων δέ τινων εἴ τις φιλῶν τινα ἐπὶ τῇ εὐπραξίᾳ αὐτοῦ λυποῖτο , ὑπεμίμνῃσκεν ὅτι πολλοὶ οὕτω πρός τινας ἔχουσιν , ὥστε κακῶς μὲν πράττοντας μὴ δύνασθαι περιορᾶν , ἀλλὰ βοηθεῖν ἀτυχοῦσιν

 , εὐτυχούντων δὲ λυπεῖσθαι .
"Some expressed surprise that anyone who loves another should be pained at his success, but he reminded them that many stand in this relation towards others, that they cannot disregard them in time of trouble, but aid them in their misfortune, and yet they are pained to see them prospering."

1324    τοῦτο μέντοι φρονίμῳ μὲν ἀνδρὶ οὐκ ἂν συμβῆναι , τοὺς ἠλιθίους δὲ ἀεὶ πάσχειν αὐτό .
"This, however, could not happen to a man of sense, but it is always the case with fools."

1325    σχολὴν δὲ σκοπῶν , τί εἴη , ποιοῦντας μέν τι τοὺς πλείστους εὑρίσκειν ἔφη ·
"Considering the nature of Leisure, he said his conclusion was that almost all men do something."

1326    καὶ γὰρ τοὺς πεττεύοντας καὶ τοὺς γελωτοποιοῦντας ποιεῖν τι ·
"Even draught-players and jesters do something,"

1327    πάντας δὲ τούτους ἔφη σχολάζειν ·
"but all these are at leisure,"

1328    ἐξεῖναι γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἰέναι πράξοντας τὰ βελτίω τούτων .
"for they might go and do something better."

1329    ἀπὸ μέντοι τῶν βελτιόνων ἐπὶ τὰ χείρω ἰέναι οὐδένα σχολάζειν ·
"But nobody has leisure to go from a better to a worse occupation."

1330    εἰ δέ τις ἴοι , τοῦτον ἀσχολίας αὐτῷ οὔσης κακῶς ἔφη τοῦτο πράττειν .
"If anyone does so, he acts wrongly, having no leisure."

1331    βασιλέας δὲ καὶ ἄρχοντας οὐ τοὺς τὰ σκῆπτρα ἔχοντας ἔφη εἶναι οὐδὲ τοὺς ὑπὸ τῶν τυχόντων αἱρεθέντας οὐδὲ τοὺς κλήρῳ λαχόντας οὐδὲ τοὺς βιασαμένους οὐδὲ τοὺς ἐξαπατήσαντας , ἀλλὰ τοὺς ἐπισταμένους ἄρχειν .
"Kings and rulers, he said, are not those who hold the sceptre, nor those who are chosen by the multitude, nor those on whom the lot falls, nor those who owe their power to force or deception; but those who know how to rule."

1332    ὁπότε γάρ τις ὁμολογήσειε τοῦ μὲν ἄρχοντος εἶναι τὸ προστάττειν ὅ τι χρὴ ποιεῖν , τοῦ δὲ ἀρχομένου τὸ πείθεσθαι , ἐπεδείκνυεν ἔν τε νηὶ τὸν μὲν ἐπιστάμενον ἄρχοντα , τὸν δὲ ναύκληρον καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς ἐν τῇ νηὶ πάντας πειθομένους τῷ ἐπισταμένῳ , καὶ ἐν γεωργίᾳ τοὺς κεκτημένους ἀγρούς , καὶ ἐν νόσῳ τοὺς νοσοῦντας , καὶ ἐν σωμασκίᾳ τοὺς σωμασκοῦντας , καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους πάντας οἷς ὑπάρχει τι ἐπιμελείας δεόμενον , ἂν μὲν αὐτοὶ ἡγῶνται ἐπίστασθαι ἐπιμελεῖσθαι — ·
"For once it was granted that it is the business of the ruler to give orders and of the ruled to obey, he went on to show that on a ship the one who knows, rules, and the owner and all the others on board obey the one who knows: in farming the landowners, in illness the patients, in training those who are in training, in fact everybody concerned with anything that needs care, look after it themselves if they think they know how, but, if not, they obey those who know, and not only when such are present, but they even send for them when absent, that they may obey them and do the right thing."

1333    εἰ δὲ μή , τοῖς ἐπισταμένοις οὐ μόνον παροῦσι πειθομένους , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπόντα

ς μεταπεμπομένους , ὅπως ἐκείνοις πειθόμενοι τὰ δέοντα πράττωσιν ·
"In cases where they do not know, they not only obey the knowledgeable when they are present, but also send for them when they are absent, so that by obeying them, they may do what is necessary."

1334    ἐν δὲ ταλασίᾳ καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας ἐπεδείκνυεν ἀρχούσας τῶν ἀνδρῶν διὰ τὸ τὰς μὲν εἰδέναι ὅπως χρὴ ταλασιουργεῖν , τοὺς δὲ μὴ εἰδέναι .
"In spinning wool, again, he would point out, the women govern the men because they know how to do it and men do not."

1335    εἰ δέ τις πρὸς ταῦτα λέγοι ὅτι τῷ τυράννῳ ἔξεστι μὴ πείθεσθαι τοῖς ὀρθῶς λέγουσι , καὶ πῶς ἄν , ἔφη , ἐξείη μὴ πείθεσθαι , ἐπικειμένης γε ζημίας , ἐάν τις τῷ εὖ λέγοντι μὴ πείθηται ;
"If anyone objected that a despot may refuse to obey a good counsellor, 'How can he refuse,' he would ask, 'when a penalty waits on disregard of good counsel? All disregard of good counsel is bound surely to result in error, and his error will not go unpunished.'"

1336    ἐν ᾧ γὰρ ἄν τις πράγματι μὴ πείθηται τῷ εὖ λέγοντι , ἁμαρτήσεται δήπου , ἁμαρτάνων δὲ ζημιωθήσεται .
"In any matter where one does not heed good advice, surely they will make a mistake, and making a mistake, they will be penalized."




1337    εἰ δὲ φαίη τις τῷ τυράννῳ ἐξεῖναι καὶ ἀποκτεῖναι τὸν εὖ φρονοῦντα , τὸν δὲ ἀποκτείνοντα , ἔφη , τοὺς κρατίστους τῶν συμμάχων οἴει ἀζήμιον γίγνεσθαι ἢ ὡς ἔτυχε ζημιοῦσθαι ;
"If anyone said that a despot can kill a loyal subject, 'Do you think,' he retorted, 'that he who kills the best of his allies suffers no loss, or that his loss is trifling? Do you think that this conduct brings him safety, or rather swift destruction?'"

1338    πότερα γὰρ ἂν μᾶλλον οἴει σῴζεσθαι τὸν τοῦτο ποιοῦντα ἢ οὕτω καὶ τάχιστ’ ἂν ἀπολέσθαι ;
"Do you think that this conduct brings him safety, or rather swift destruction?"

1339    ἐρομένου δέ τινος αὐτὸν τί δοκοίη αὐτῷ κράτιστον ἀνδρὶ ἐπιτήδευμα εἶναι , ἀπεκρίνατο ·
When someone asked him what seemed to him the best pursuit for a man, he answered:

1340    εὐπραξία .
"Doing well."

1341    ἐρομένου δὲ πάλιν εἰ καὶ τὴν εὐτυχίαν ἐπιτήδευμα νομίζοι εἶναι , πᾶν μὲν οὖν τ- ἐναντίον ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη , τύχην καὶ πρᾶξιν ἡγοῦμαι ·
Questioned further, whether he thought good luck a pursuit, he said: "On the contrary, I think luck and doing are opposite poles. To hit on something right by luck without search I call good luck, to do something well after study and practice I call doing well; and those who pursue this seem to me to do well."

1342    τὸ μὲν γὰρ μὴ ζητοῦντα ἐπιτυχεῖν τινι τῶν δεόντων εὐτυχίαν οἶμαι εἶναι , τὸ δὲ μαθόντα τε καὶ μελετήσαντά τι εὖ ποιεῖν εὐπραξίαν νομίζω , καὶ οἱ τοῦτο ἐπιτηδεύοντες δοκοῦσί μοι εὖ πράττειν .
"To achieve something desirable by chance without seeking it I consider to be good luck. To do something well after learning and practice I consider to be doing well, and those who pursue this seem to me to do well."

1343    καὶ ἀρίστους δὲ καὶ θεοφιλεστάτους ἔφη εἶναι ἐν μὲν γεωργίᾳ τοὺς τὰ γεωργικὰ εὖ πράττοντας , ἐν δ’ ἰατρείᾳ τοὺς τὰ ἰατρικά , ἐν δὲ πολιτείᾳ τοὺς τὰ πολιτικά ·
"And the best men and dearest to the gods," he added, "are those who do their work well; if it is farming, as good farmers; if medicine, as good doctors; if politics, as good politicians."

1344    τὸν δὲ μηδὲν εὖ πράττοντα οὔτε χρήσιμον οὐδὲν ἔφη εἶναι οὔτε θεοφιλῆ .
"He who does nothing well is neither useful in any way nor dear to the gods."

1345    ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ εἴ ποτε τῶν τὰς τέχνας ἐχόντων καὶ ἐργασίας ἕνεκα χρωμένων αὐταῖς διαλέγοιτό τινι , καὶ τούτοις ὠφέλιμος ἦν .
"Then again, whenever he talked with artists who followed their art as a business, he was as useful to them as to others."

1346    εἰσελθὼν μὲν γάρ ποτε πρὸς Παρράσιον τὸν ζωγράφον καὶ διαλεγόμενος αὐτῷ , ἆρα , ἔφη , ὦ Παρράσιε , γραφική ἐστιν εἰκασία τῶν ὁρωμένων ;
"Thus, on entering the house of Parrhasius the painter one day, he asked in the course of a conversation with him: 'Is painting a representation of things seen, Parrhasius? 

1347    τὰ γοῦν κοῖλα καὶ τὰ ὑψηλὰ καὶ τὰ σκοτεινὰ καὶ τὰ φωτεινὰ καὶ τὰ σκληρὰ καὶ τὰ μαλακὰ καὶ τὰ τραχέα καὶ τὰ λεῖα καὶ τὰ νέα καὶ τὰ παλαιὰ σώματα διὰ τῶν χρωμάτων ἀπεικάζοντες ἐκμιμεῖσθε .
Anyhow, you painters with your colours represent and reproduce figures high and low, in light and in shadow, hard and soft, rough and smooth, young and old.'"

1348    ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .
"True," [Parrhasius] said.

1349    καὶ μὴν τά γε καλὰ εἴδη ἀφομοιοῦντες , ἐπειδὴ οὐ ῥᾴδιον ἑνὶ ἀνθρώπῳ περιτυχεῖν ἄμεμπτα πάντα ἔχοντι , ἐκ πολλῶν συνάγοντες τὰ ἐξ ἑκάστου κάλλιστα οὕτως ὅλα τὰ σώματα καλὰ ποιεῖτε φαίνεσθαι .
"And further, when you copy types of beauty, it is so difficult to find a perfect model that you combine the most beautiful details of several, and thus contrive to make the whole figure look beautiful."

1350    ποιοῦμεν γάρ , ἔφη , οὕτως .
"Yes, we do!" [Parrhasius] said.

1351    τί γάρ ;
"Well now,"

1352    ἔφη , τὸ πιθανώτατον καὶ ἥδιστον καὶ φιλικώτατον καὶ ποθεινότατον καὶ ἐρασμιώτατον ἀπομιμεῖσθε τῆς ψυχῆς ἦθος ;
"Do you also reproduce the character of the soul, the character that is in the highest degree captivating, delightful, friendly, fascinating, lovable? Or is it impossible to imitate that?"

1353    ἢ οὐδὲ μιμητόν ἐστι τοῦτο ;
"Or is it not imitable?"

1354    πῶς γὰρ ἄν , ἔφη , μιμητὸν εἴη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ὃ μήτε συμμετρίαν μήτε χρῶμα μήτε ὧν σὺ εἶπας ἄρτι μηδὲν ἔχει μηδὲ ὅλως ὁρατόν ἐστιν ;
"Oh no, Socrates," [Parrhasius] said, "for how could one imitate that which has neither shape nor colour nor any of the qualities you mentioned just now, and is not even visible?"

1348    ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .
"You speak the truth," [Socrates] said.

1349    καὶ μὴν τά γε καλὰ εἴδη ἀφομοιοῦντες , ἐπειδὴ οὐ ῥᾴδιον ἑνὶ ἀνθρώπῳ περιτυχεῖν ἄμεμπτα πάντα ἔχοντι , ἐκ πολλῶν συνάγοντες τὰ ἐξ ἑκάστου κάλλιστα οὕτως ὅλα τὰ σώματα καλὰ ποιεῖτε φαίνεσθαι .
"And further, when you copy types of beauty, it is so difficult to find a perfect model that you combine the most beautiful details of several, and thus contrive to make the whole figure look beautiful."

1350    ποιοῦμεν γάρ , ἔφη , οὕτως .
"We do, indeed," [Parrhasius] said.

1351    τί γάρ ;
"What about," [Socrates] asked,

1352    ἔφη , τὸ πιθανώτατον καὶ ἥδιστον καὶ φιλικώτατον καὶ ποθεινότατον καὶ ἐρασμιώτατον ἀπομιμεῖσθε τῆς ψυχῆς ἦθος ;
"Do you also reproduce the character of the soul, the character that is in the highest degree captivating, delightful, friendly, fascinating, lovable? Or is it impossible to imitate that?"

1353    ἢ οὐδὲ μιμητόν ἐστι τοῦτο ;
"Or is it not imitable?"

1354    πῶς γὰρ ἄν , ἔφη , μιμητὸν εἴη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ὃ μήτε συμμετρίαν μήτε χρῶμα μήτε ὧν σὺ εἶπας ἄρτι μηδὲν ἔχει μηδὲ ὅλως ὁρατόν ἐστιν ;
"How can it be," [Parrhasius] said, "imitated, Socrates, when it has neither symmetry, nor color, nor any of the qualities you just mentioned, nor is it at all visible?"

1355    ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , γίγνεται ἐν ἀνθρώπῳ τό τε φιλοφρόνως καὶ τὸ ἐχθρῶς βλέπειν πρός τινας ;
"Do human beings commonly express the feelings of sympathy and aversion by their looks?" [Socrates] asked.

1356    ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Parrhasius] replied.

1357    οὐκοῦν τοῦτό γε μιμητὸν ἐν τοῖς ὄμμασι ;
"Then cannot thus much be imitated in the eyes?"

1358    καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Undoubtedly," [Parrhasius] replied.

1359    ἐπὶ δ

ὲ τοῖς τῶν φίλων ἀγαθοῖς καὶ τοῖς κακοῖς ὁμοίως σοι δοκοῦσιν ἔχειν τὰ πρόσωπα οἵ τε φροντίζοντες καὶ οἱ μή ;
"Do you think that the joys and sorrows of their friends produce the same expression on men’s faces, whether they really care or not?" [Socrates] asked.

1360    μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτα , ἔφη ·
"Oh no, of course not," [Parrhasius] said; 

1361    ἐπὶ μὲν γὰρ τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς φαιδροί , ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς κακοῖς σκυθρωποὶ γίγνονται .
"they look radiant at their joys, downcast at their sorrows."

1362    οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , καὶ ταῦτα δυνατὸν ἀπεικάζειν ;
"Then is it possible to represent these looks too?" [Socrates] asked.



1363    καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Undoubtedly," [Parrhasius] replied.

1364    ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ τὸ μεγαλοπρεπές τε καὶ ἐλευθέριον καὶ τὸ ταπεινόν τε καὶ ἀνελεύθερον καὶ τὸ σωφρονικόν τε καὶ φρόνιμον καὶ τὸ ὑβριστικόν τε καὶ ἀπειρόκαλον καὶ διὰ τοῦ προσώπου καὶ διὰ τῶν σχημάτων καὶ ἑστώτων καὶ κινουμένων ἀνθρώπων διαφαίνει .
"Moreover, nobility and dignity, self-abasement and servility, prudence and understanding, insolence and vulgarity, are reflected in the face and in the attitudes of the body whether still or in motion."

1365    ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .
"True," [Parrhasius] said.

1366    οὐκοῦν καὶ ταῦτα μιμητά ;
"Then these, too, can be imitated, can they not?"

1367    καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Undoubtedly," [Parrhasius] replied.

1368    πότερον οὖν , ἔφη , νομίζεις ἥδιον ὁρᾶν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους δι’ ὧν τὰ καλά τε κ- ἀγαθὰ καὶ ἀγαπητὰ ἤθη φαίνεται ἢ δι’ ὧν τὰ αἰσχρά τε καὶ πονηρὰ καὶ μισητά ;
"Now which do you think the more pleasing sight, one whose features and bearing reflect a beautiful and good and lovable character, or one who is the embodiment of what is ugly and depraved and hateful?" [Socrates] asked.

1369    πολὺ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , διαφέρει , ὦ Σώκρατες .
"No doubt there is a great difference, Socrates," [Parrhasius] said.

1370    πρὸς δὲ Κλείτωνα τὸν ἀνδριαντοποιὸν εἰσελθών ποτε καὶ διαλεγόμενος αὐτῷ , ὅτι μέν , ἔφη , ὦ Κλείτων , καλοὶ οὓς ποιεῖς δρομέας τε καὶ παλαιστὰς καὶ πύκτας καὶ παγκρατιαστάς , ὁρῶ τε καὶ οἶδα ·
"On another occasion he visited Cleiton the sculptor, and while conversing with him said: 'Cleiton, that your statues of runners, wrestlers, boxers and fighters are beautiful I see and know."

1371    ὃ δὲ μάλιστα ψυχαγωγεῖ

 διὰ τῆς ὄψεως τοὺς ἀνθρώπους , τὸ ζωτικὸν φαίνεσθαι , πῶς τοῦτο ἐνεργάζῃ τοῖς ἀνδριᾶσιν ;
"But how do you produce in them that illusion of life which is their most alluring charm to the beholder?"

1372    ἐπεὶ δὲ ἀπορῶν ὁ Κλείτων οὐ ταχὺ ἀπεκρίνατο , ἆρ’ , ἔφη , τοῖς τῶν ζώντων εἴδεσιν ἀπεικάζων τὸ ἔργον ζωτικωτέρους ποιεῖς φαίνεσθαι τοὺς ἀνδριάντας ;
"As Cleiton was puzzled and did not reply at once, 'Is it,' he added, 'by faithfully representing the form of living beings that you make your statues look as if they lived?'"

1373    καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Undoubtedly," [Cleiton] said.

1374    οὐκοῦν τά τε ὑπὸ τῶν σχημάτων κατασπώμενα καὶ τ- ἀνασπώμενα ἐν τοῖς σώμασι καὶ τὰ συμπιεζόμενα καὶ τὰ διελκόμενα καὶ τὰ ἐντεινόμενα καὶ τὰ ἀνιέμενα ἀπεικάζων ὁμοιότερά τε τοῖς ἀληθινοῖς καὶ πιθανώτερα ποιεῖς φαίνεσθαι ;
"Then is it not by accurately representing the different parts of the body as they are affected by the pose — the flesh wrinkled or tense, the limbs compressed or outstretched, the muscles taut or loose — that you make them look more like real members and more convincing?"

1375    πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Absolutely," [Parrhasius] said.

1376    τὸ δὲ καὶ τὰ πάθη τῶν ποιούντων τι σωμάτων ἀπομιμεῖσθαι οὐ ποιεῖ τινα τέρψιν τοῖς θεωμένοις ;
"Does not the exact imitation of the feelings that affect bodies in action also produce a sense of satisfaction in the spectator?"

1377    εἰκὸς γοῦν , ἔφη .
"Oh yes, presumably," [Parrhasius] said.

1378    οὐκοῦν καὶ τῶν μὲν μαχομένων ἀπειλητικὰ τὰ ὄμματα ἀπεικαστέον , τῶν δὲ νενικηκότων εὐφραινομένων ἡ ὄψις μιμητέα ;
"Then must not the threatening look in the eyes of fighters be accurately represented, and the triumphant expression on the face of conquerors be imitated?"

1379    σφόδρα γ’ , ἔφη .
"Most certainly," [Parrhasius] said.

1380    δεῖ ἄρα , ἔφη , τὸν ἀνδριαντοποιὸν τὰ τῆς ψυχῆς ἔργα τῷ εἴδει προσεικάζειν .
"It follows, then, that the sculptor must represent in his figures the activities of the soul."

1381    πρὸς δὲ Πιστίαν τὸν θωρακοποιὸν εἰσελθών , ἐπιδείξαντος αὐτοῦ τῷ Σωκράτει θώρακας εὖ εἰργασμένους , νὴ τὴν Ἥραν , ἔφη , καλόν γε , ὦ Πιστία , τὸ εὕρημα τὸ τὰ μὲν δεόμενα σκέπης τοῦ ἀνθρώπου σκεπάζειν τὸν θώρακα , ταῖς δὲ χερσὶ μὴ κωλύειν χρῆσθαι .
"On visiting Pistias the armourer, who showed him some well-made breastplates, Socrates exclaimed: 'Upon my word, Pistias, it’s a beautiful invention, for the breastplate covers the parts that need protection without impeding the use of the hands.'"

1382    ἀτάρ , ἔφη , λέξον μοι , ὦ Πιστία , διὰ τί οὔτ’ ἰσχυροτέρους οὔτε πολυτελεστέρους τῶν ἄλλων ποιῶν τοὺς θώρακας πλείονος πωλεῖς ;
"But tell me, Pistias," he added, "why do you charge more for your breastplates than any other maker, though they are no stronger and cost no more to make?"

1383    ὅτι , ἔφη , ὦ Σ

ώκρατες , εὐρυθμοτέρους ποιῶ .
"Because the proportions of mine are better, Socrates," [Pistias] said.

1384    τὸν δὲ ῥυθμόν , ἔφη , πότερα μέτρῳ ἢ σταθμῷ ἀποδεικνύων πλείονος τιμᾷ ;
"And how do you show their proportions when you ask a higher price — by weight or measure? For I presume you don’t make them all of the same weight or the same size, that is, if you make them to fit."

1385    οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἴσους γε πάντας οὐδὲ ὁμοίους οἶμαί σε ποιεῖν , εἴ γε ἁρμόττοντας ποιεῖς .
"I don't think you make them all equal or similar, if indeed you make them fitting."

1386    ἀλλὰ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ποιῶ ·
"Indeed, by Zeus, I do," [Pistias] said.

1387    οὐδὲν γὰρ ὄφελός ἐστι θώρακος ἄνευ τούτου .
"For there is no use for a breastplate without this."

1388    οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , σώματά γε ἀνθρώπων τὰ μὲν εὔρυθμά ἐστι , τὰ δὲ ἄρρυθμα ;
"Then are not some human bodies well, others ill proportioned?" [Socrates] asked.

1389    πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Pistias] replied.

1390    πῶς οὖν , ἔφη , τῷ ἀρρύθμῳ σώματι ἁρμόττοντα τὸν θώρακα εὔρυθμον ποιεῖς ;
"Then if a breastplate is to fit an ill-proportioned body, how do you make it well-proportioned?" [Socrates] asked.

1391    ὥσπερ καὶ ἁρμόττοντα , ἔφη ·
"By making it fit; for if it is a good fit it is well-proportioned," [Pistias] said.

1392    ὁ ἁρμόττων γάρ ἐστιν εὔρυθμος .
"A good fit is well-proportioned."

1393    δοκεῖς μοι , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , τὸ εὔρυθμον οὐ καθ’ ἑαυτὸ λέγειν , ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸν χρώμενον , ὥσπερ ἂν εἰ φαίης ἀσπίδα , ᾧ ἂν ἁρμόττῃ , τούτῳ εὔρυθμον εἶναι , καὶ χλαμύδα , καὶ τ- ἄλλα ὡσαύτως ἔοικεν ἔχειν τῷ σῷ λόγῳ .
"Apparently you mean well-proportioned not absolutely, but in relation to the wearer, as you might call a shield well-proportioned for the man whom it fits, or a military cape — and this seems to apply to everything according to you," [Socrates] said.

1394    ἴσως δὲ καὶ ἄλλο τι οὐ μικρὸν ἀγαθὸν τῷ ἁρμόττειν πρόσεστι .
"And perhaps there is another important advantage in a good fit."

1395    δίδαξον , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , εἴ τι ἔχεις .
"Tell it me, if you know, Socrates," [Pistias] said.

1396    ἧττον , ἔφη , τῷ βάρει πιέζουσιν οἱ ἁρμόττοντες τῶν ἀναρμόστων τὸν αὐτὸν σταθμὸν ἔχοντες .
"The good fit is less heavy to wear than the misfit, though both are of the same weight," [Socrates] said. 

1397    οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἀνάρμοστοι ἢ ὅλοι ἐκ τῶν ὤμων κρεμάμενοι ἢ καὶ ἄλλο

 τι τοῦ σώματος σφόδρα πιέζοντες δύσφοροι καὶ χαλεποὶ γίγνονται ·
"For the misfit, hanging entirely from the shoulders, or pressing on some other part of the body, proves uncomfortable and irksome."

1398    οἱ δὲ ἁρμόττοντες , διειλημμένοι τὸ βάρος τὸ μὲν ὑπὸ τῶν κλειδῶν καὶ ἐπωμίδων , τὸ δ’ ὑπὸ τῶν ὤμων , τὸ δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ στήθους , τὸ δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ νώτου , τὸ δὲ ὑπὸ τῆς γαστρός , ὀλίγου δεῖν οὐ φορήματι , ἀλλὰ προσθήματι ἐοίκασιν .
"But the good fit, with its weight distributed over the collar-bone and shoulder-blades, the shoulders, chest, back, and belly, may almost be called an accessory rather than an encumbrance."

1399    εἴρηκας , ἔφη , αὐτὸ δι’ ὅπερ ἔγωγε τὰ ἐμὰ ἔργα πλείστου ἄξια νομίζω εἶναι .
"You have said it," [Pistias] said, "that very reason is why I think my work is worth a high price."

1400    ἔνιοι μέντοι τοὺς ποικίλους καὶ τοὺς ἐπιχρύσους θώρακας μᾶλλον ὠνοῦνται .
"Some, however, prefer to buy the ornate and gold-plated breastplates."

1401    ἀλλὰ μήν , ἔφη , εἴ γε διὰ ταῦτα μὴ ἁρμόττοντας ὠνοῦνται , κακὸν ἔμοιγε δοκοῦσι ποικίλον τε καὶ ἐπίχρυσον ὠνεῖσθαι .
"Still, if they are buying these for their looks rather than their fit, it seems to me they are buying ornate and gold-plated trash."

1402    ἀτάρ , ἔφη , τοῦ σώματος μὴ μένοντος , ἀλλὰ τοτὲ μὲν κυρτουμένου , τοτὲ δὲ ὀρθουμένου , πῶς ἂν ἀκριβεῖς θώρακες ἁρμόττοιεν ;
"However, as the body is not rigid, but now bent, now straight, how can tight breastplates fit?" [Socrates] asked.

1403    οὐδαμῶς , ἔφη .
"They can’t," [Pistias] said.

1404    λέγεις , ἔφη , ἁρμόττειν οὐ τοὺς ἀκριβεῖς , ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὴ λυποῦντας ἐν τῇ χρείᾳ .
"You mean that the good fits are not the tight ones, but those that don’t chafe the wearer?" [Socrates] said.

1405    αὐτός , ἔφη , τοῦτο λέγεις , ὦ Σώκρατες , καὶ πάνυ ὀρθῶς ἀποδέχῃ .
"That is your own meaning, Socrates, and you have hit the right nail on the head," [Pistias] replied.

1406    γυναικὸς δέ ποτε οὔσης ἐν τῇ πόλει καλῆς , ᾗ ὄνομα ἦν Θεοδότη , καὶ οἵας συνεῖναι τῷ πείθοντι , μνησθέντος αὐτῆς τῶν παρόντων τινὸς καὶ εἰπόντος ὅτι κρεῖττον εἴη λόγου τὸ κάλλος τῆς γυναικός , καὶ ζωγράφους φήσα

ντος εἰσιέναι πρὸς αὐτὴν ἀπεικασομένους , οἷς ἐκείνην ἐπιδεικνύειν ἑαυτῆς ὅσα καλῶς ἔχοι , ἰτέον ἂν εἴη θεασομένους , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης ·
"At one time there was in Athens a beautiful woman named Theodoté, who was ready to keep company with anyone who pleased her. One of the bystanders mentioned her name, declaring that words failed him to describe the lady’s beauty, and adding that artists visited her to paint her portrait, and she showed them as much as decency allowed. 'We had better go and see her,' cried Socrates; 'of course what beggars description can’t very well be learned by hearsay.'"

1407    οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἀκούσασί γε τὸ λόγου κρεῖττον ἔστι καταμαθεῖν .
"For it is better to learn about something superior to words by seeing it rather than by hearing," [Socrates] said.

1408    καὶ ὁ διηγησάμενος , οὐκ ἂν φθάνοιτ’ , ἔφη , ἀκολουθοῦντες .
"And the one who was telling the story said, 'You would not be the first to follow her,'" [Socrates] added.

1409    οὕτω μὲν δὴ πορευθέντες πρὸς τὴν Θεοδότην καὶ καταλαβόντες ζωγράφῳ τινὶ παρεστηκυῖαν ἐθεάσαντο .
"So they went to see Theodoté and found her posing for a painter."

1410    παυσαμένου δὲ τοῦ ζωγράφου , ὦ ἄνδρες , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , πότερον ἡμᾶς δεῖ μᾶλλον Θεοδότῃ χάριν ἔχειν , ὅτι ἡμῖν τὸ κάλλος ἑαυτῆς ἐπέδειξεν , ἢ ταύτην ἡμῖν , ὅτι ἐθεασάμεθα ;
"After the painter finished, Socrates asked, 'Should we be more grateful to Theodoté for showing us her beauty, or should she be grateful to us for beholding it?'"

1411    ἆρ’ εἰ μὲν ταύτῃ ὠφελιμωτέρα ἐστὶν ἡ ἐπίδειξις , ταύτην ἡμῖν χάριν ἑκτέον , εἰ δὲ ἡμῖν ἡ θέα , ἡμᾶς ταύτῃ ;
"Is the obligation with her if the display benefits her more, or with us if we benefit more from the viewing?"

1412    εἰπόντος δέ τινος ὅτι δίκαια λέγοι , οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , αὕτη μὲν ἤδη τε παρ’ ἡμῶν ἔπαινον κερδαίνει καί , ἐπειδὰν εἰς πλείους διαγγείλωμεν , πλείω ὠφελήσεται ·
"When someone agreed that this was fair, Socrates said, 'She already gains praise from us and will benefit more when we tell others.'"

1413    ἡμεῖς δὲ ἤδη τε ὧν ἐθεασάμεθα ἐπιθυμοῦμεν ἅψασθαι καὶ ἄπιμεν ὑποκνιζόμενοι καὶ ἀπελθόντες ποθήσομεν .
"As for us, we now long to touch what we have seen, leave excited, and yearn for her when gone."

1414    ἐκ δὲ τούτων εἰκὸς ἡμᾶς μὲν θεραπεύειν , ταύτην δὲ θεραπεύεσθαι .
"From this, it's likely that we become her worshippers, and she becomes worshipped."

1415    καὶ ἡ Θεοδότη , νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , εἰ τοίνυν ταῦθ’ οὕτως ἔχει , ἐμὲ ἂν δέοι ὑμῖν τῆς θέας χάριν ἔχειν .
"Theodoté then said, 'Indeed, if it is so, then I should be grateful to you for viewing.'"

1416    ἐκ δὲ τούτου ὁ Σωκράτης ὁρῶν αὐτήν τε πολυτελῶς κεκοσμημένην καὶ μητέρα παροῦσαν αὐτῇ ἐν ἐσθῆτί τε καὶ θεραπείᾳ οὐ τῇ τυχούσῃ , καὶ θεραπαίνας πολλὰς καὶ εὐειδεῖς καὶ οὐδὲ ταύτας ἠμελημένως ἐχούσας , καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις τὴν οἰκίαν ἀφθόνως κατεσκευασμένην , εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Θεοδότη , ἔστι σοι ἀγρός ;
"Socrates, noticing her luxurious dress, her well-attired mother and maids, and her lavishly furnished house, asked, 'Tell me, Theodoté, do you have a farm?'"

1417    οὐκ ἔμοιγ’ , ἔφη .
"Not I," she answered.

1418    ἀλλ’ ἄρα οἰκία προσόδους ἔχουσα ;
"Or a house, perhaps, that brings in money?"

1419    οὐδὲ οἰκία , ἔφη .
"No, nor a house," she said.

1420    ἀλλὰ μὴ χειροτέχναι τινές ;
"Some craftsmen, possibly?"

1421    οὐδὲ χειροτέχναι , ἔφη .
"No, none," she replied.

1422    πόθεν οὖν , ἔφη , τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἔχεις ;
"Then where do you get your supplies from?" [Socrates] asked.

1423    ἐάν τις , ἔφη , φίλος μοι γενόμενος εὖ ποιεῖν ἐθέλῃ , οὗτός μοι βίος ἐστί .
"If someone, becoming a friend, wishes to treat me well, that is my livelihood," she replied.

1424	νὴ τὴν Ἥραν , ἔφη , ὦ Θεοδότη , καλόν γε τὸ κτῆμα καὶ πολλῷ κρεῖττον ἢ οἰῶν τε καὶ αἰγῶν καὶ βοῶν φίλων ἀγέλην κεκτῆσθαι .
Upon my word, Theodoté, a fine property, and much better than abundance of sheep and goats and oxen.

1425	ἀτάρ , ἔφη , πότερον τῇ τύχῃ ἐπιτρέπεις , ἐάν τίς σοι φίλος ὥσπερ μυῖα πρόσπτηται , ἢ καὶ αὐτή τι μηχανᾷ ;
But, do you trust to luck, waiting for friends to settle on you like flies, or have you some contrivance of your own?

1426	πῶς δ’ ἄν , ἔφη , ἐγὼ τούτου μηχανὴν εὕροιμι ;
How could I invent a contrivance for that?

1427	πολὺ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , προσηκόντως μᾶλλον ἢ αἱ φάλαγγες ·
Much more conveniently, I assure you, than the spiders.

1428	οἶσθα γὰρ ὡς ἐκεῖναι θηρῶσι τὰ πρὸς τὸν βίον ·
For you know how they hunt for a living.

1429	ἀράχνια γὰρ δήπου λεπτὰ ὑφηνάμεναι , ὅ τι ἂν ἐνταῦθα ἐμπέσῃ , τούτῳ τροφῇ χρῶνται .
They weave a thin web, I believe, and feed on anything that gets into it.

1430	καὶ ἐμοὶ οὖν , ἔφη , συμβουλεύεις ὑφήνασθαί τι θήρατρον ;
And do you advise me, then, to weave a trap of some sort?

1431	οὐ γὰρ δὴ οὕτω γε ἀτέχνως οἴεσθαι χρὴ τὸ πλείστου ἄξιον ἄγρευμα , φίλους , θηράσειν .
Of course not. Don’t suppose you are going to hunt friends, the noblest game in the world, by such crude methods.

1432	οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅτι καὶ τὸ μικροῦ ἄξιον , τοὺς λαγῶς , θηρῶντες πολλὰ τεχνάζουσιν ;
Don’t you notice that many tricks are employed even for hunting such a poor thing as the hare?

1433	ὅτι μὲν γὰρ τῆς νυκτὸς νέμονται , κύνας νυκτερευτικὰς πορισάμενοι , ταύταις αὐτοὺς θηρῶσιν ·
Since hares feed by night, hounds specially adapted for night work are provided to hunt them.

1434	ὅτι δὲ μεθ’ ἡμέραν ἀποδιδράσκουσιν , ἄλλας κτῶνται κύνας , αἵτινες , ᾗ ἂν ἐκ τῆς νομῆς εἰς τὴν εὐνὴν ἀπέλθωσι , τῇ ὀσμῇ αἰσθανόμεναι εὑρίσκουσιν αὐτούς ·
And since they run away at daybreak, another pack of hounds is obtained for tracking them by the scent along the run from the feeding ground to the form.

1435	ὅτι δὲ ποδώκεις εἰσὶν ὥστε καὶ ἐκ τοῦ φανεροῦ τρέχοντες ἀποφεύγειν , ἄλλας αὖ κύνας ταχείας παρασκευάζονται , ἵνα κατὰ πόδας ἁλίσκωνται ·
And since they are so nimble that once they are off they actually escape in the open, yet a third pack of speedy hounds is formed to catch them by hot pursuit.

1436	ὅτι δὲ καὶ ταύτας αὐτῶν τινες ἀποφεύγουσι , δίκτυα ἱστᾶσιν εἰς τὰς ἀτραπούς , ᾗ φεύγουσιν , ἵν’ εἰς ταῦτα ἐμπίπτοντες συμποδίζωνται .
And as some escape even so, nets are set up in the tracks where they escape, that they may be driven into them and stopped dead.

1437	τίνι οὖν , ἔφη , τοιούτῳ φίλους ἂν ἐγὼ θηρῴην ;
Then can I adapt this plan to the pursuit of friends?

1438	ἐὰν νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ἀντὶ κυνὸς κτήσῃ , ὅστις σοι ἰχνεύων μὲν τοὺς φιλοκάλους καὶ πλουσίους εὑρήσει , εὑρὼν δὲ μηχανήσεται ὅπως ἐμβάλῃ αὐτοὺς εἰς τὰ σὰ δίκτυα .
Of course you can, if for the hound you substitute an agent who will track and find rich men with an eye for beauty, and will then contrive to chase them into your nets.

1439	καὶ ποῖα , ἔφη , ἐγὼ δίκτυα ἔχω ;
Nets! What nets have I got?

1440	ἓν μὲν δήπου , ἔφη , καὶ μάλα εὖ περιπλεκόμενον , τὸ σῶμα ·
One, surely, that clips close enough — your body!

1441	ἐν δὲ τούτῳ ψυχήν , ᾗ καταμανθάνεις καὶ ὡς ἂν ἐμβλέπουσα χαρίζοιο καὶ ὅ τι ἂν λέγουσα εὐφραίνοις , καὶ ὅτι δεῖ τὸν μὲν ἐπιμελόμενον ἀσμένως ὑποδέχεσθαι , τὸν δὲ τρυφῶντα ἀποκλείειν , καὶ ἀρρωστήσαντός γε φίλου φροντιστικῶς ἐπισκέψασθαι καὶ καλόν τι πράξαντος σφόδρα συνησθῆναι καὶ τῷ σφόδρα σοῦ φροντίζοντι ὅλῃ τῇ ψυχῇ κεχαρίσθαι ·
And inside it you have a soul that teaches you what glance will please, what words delight, and tells you that your business is to give a warm welcome to an eager suitor, but to slam the door upon a coxcomb; yes, and when a friend has fallen sick, to show your anxiety by visiting him; and when he has had a stroke of good fortune, to congratulate him eagerly; and if he is eager in his suit, to put yourself at his service heart and soul.

1442	φιλεῖν γε μὴν εὖ οἶδ’ ὅτι ἐπίστασαι οὐ μόνον μαλακῶς , ἀλλὰ καὶ εὐνοϊκῶς ·
As for loving, you know how to do that, I am sure, both tenderly and truly.

1443	καὶ ὅτι ἀρεστοί σοί εἰσιν οἱ φίλοι , οἶδ’ ὅτι οὐ λόγῳ ἀλλ’ ἔργῳ ἀναπείθεις .
And that your friends give you satisfaction, you convince them, I know, not by words but by deeds.

1444	μὰ τὸν Δί’ , ἔφη ἡ Θεοδότη , ἐγὼ τούτων οὐδὲν μηχανῶμαι .
Upon my word, said Theodoté, I don’t contrive one of these things.

1445	καὶ μήν , ἔφη , πολὺ διαφέρει τὸ κατὰ φύσιν τε καὶ ὀρθῶς ἀνθρώπῳ προσφέρεσθαι .
Nevertheless, he continued, it is very important that your behaviour to a man should be both natural and correct.

1446	καὶ γὰρ δὴ βίᾳ μὲν οὔτ’ ἂν ἕλοις οὔτε κατάσχοις φίλον , εὐεργεσίᾳ δὲ καὶ ἡδονῇ τὸ θηρίον τοῦτο ἁλώσιμόν τε καὶ παραμόνιμόν ἐστιν .
For assuredly you can neither catch a friend nor keep him by violence; it is kindness and sweetness that catch the creature and hold him fast.

1447	ἀληθῆ λέγεις , ἔφη .
True, she said.

1448	δεῖ τοίνυν , ἔφη , πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς φροντίζοντάς σου τοιαῦτα ἀξιοῦν , οἷα ποιοῦσιν αὐτοῖς μικρότατα μελήσει , ἔπειτα δὲ αὐτὴν ἀμείβεσθαι χαριζομένην τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ·
First, then, you must ask such favours of your suitors as they will grant without a moment's hesitation; and next you must repay their favours in the same coin.

1449	οὕτω γὰρ ἂν μάλιστα φίλοι γίγνοιντο καὶ πλεῖστον χρόνον φιλοῖεν καὶ μέγιστα εὐεργετοῖεν .
For in this way they will prove most sincerely your friends, most constant in their affection and most generous.

1450	χαρίζοιο δ’ ἂν μάλιστα , εἰ δεομένοις δωροῖο τὰ παρὰ σεαυτῆς ·
And they will appreciate your favours most highly if you wait till they ask for them.

1451	ὁρᾷς γὰρ ὅτι καὶ τῶν βρωμάτων τὰ ἥδιστα , ἐὰν μέν τις προσφέρῃ πρὶν ἐπιθυμεῖν , ἀηδῆ φαίνεται , κεκορεσμένοις δὲ καὶ βδελυγμίαν παρέχει , ἐὰν δέ τις προσφέρῃ λιμὸν ἐμποιήσας , κἂν φαυλότερα ᾖ , πάνυ ἡδέα φαίνεται .
The sweetest meats, you see, if served before they are wanted, seem sour, and to those who have had enough they are positively nauseating; but even poor fare is very welcome when offered to a hungry man.

1452	πῶς οὖν ἄν , ἔφη , ἐγὼ λιμὸν ἐμποιεῖν τῶν παρ’ ἐμοὶ δυναίμην ;
And how can I make them hunger for my fare?

1453	εἰ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , πρῶτον μὲν τοῖς κεκορεσμένοις μήτε προσφέροις μήτε ὑπομιμνῄσκοις , ἕως ἂν τῆς πλησμονῆς παυσάμενοι πάλιν δέωνται , ἔπειτα τοὺς δεομένους ὑπομιμνῄσκοις ὡς κοσμιωτάτῃ τε ὁμιλίᾳ καὶ τῷ μὴ φαίνεσθαι βουλομένη χαρίζεσθαι καὶ διαφεύγουσα , ἕως ἂν ὡς μάλιστα δεηθῶσι ·
Why, in the first place, you must not offer it to them when they have had enough, nor prompt them until they have thrown off the surfeit and are beginning to want more; then, when they feel the want, you must prompt them by behaving as a model of propriety, by a show of reluctance to yield, and by holding back until they are as keen as can be.

1454	τηνικαῦτα γὰρ πολὺ διαφέρει τὰ αὐτὰ δῶρα ἢ πρὶν ἐπιθυμῆσαι διδόναι .
For then the same gifts are much more to the recipient than when they are offered before they are desired.

1455	καὶ ἡ Θεοδότη , τί οὖν οὐ σύ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἐγένου συνθηρατὴς τῶν φίλων ;
Then, Socrates, exclaimed Theodoté, why don’t you become my partner in the pursuit of friends?

1456	ἐάν γε νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , πείθῃς με σύ .
By all means — if you persuade me.

1457	πῶς οὖν ἄν , ἔφη , πείσαιμί σε ;
And how am I to persuade you?

1458	ζητήσεις , ἔφη , τοῦτο αὐτὴ καὶ μηχανήσει , ἐάν τί μου δέῃ .
That you will find out and contrive for yourself, if you want my help.

1459	εἴσιθι τοίνυν , ἔφη , θαμινά .
Come and see me often, then.

1460	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἐπισκώπτων τὴν αὑτοῦ ἀπραγμοσύνην , ἀλλ’ , ὦ Θεοδότη , ἔφη , οὐ πάνυ μοι ῥᾴδιόν ἐστι σχολάσαι ·
Ah! said Socrates, making fun of his own leisurely habits, it’s not so easy for me to find time.

1461	καὶ γὰρ ἴδια πράγματα πολλὰ καὶ δημόσια παρέχει μοι ἀσχολίαν ·
For I have much business to occupy me, private and public;

1462	εἰσὶ δὲ καὶ φίλαι μοι , αἳ οὔτε ἡμέρας οὔτε νυκτὸς ἀφ’ αὑτῶν ἐάσουσί με ἀπιέναι , φίλτρα τε μανθάνουσαι παρ’ ἐμοῦ καὶ ἐπῳδάς .
and I have the dear girls, who won’t leave me day or night; they are studying potions with me and spells.

1463	ἐπίστασαι γάρ , ἔφη , καὶ ταῦτα , ὦ Σώκρατες ;
Indeed! do you understand these things too, Socrates?

1464	ἀλλὰ διὰ τί οἴει , ἔφη , Ἀπολλόδωρόν τε τόνδε καὶ Ἀντισθένη οὐδέποτέ μου ἀπολείπεσθαι ;
Why, what is the reason that master Apollodorus and Antisthenes never leave me, do you suppose?

1465	διὰ τί δὲ καὶ Κέβητα καὶ Σιμίαν Θήβηθεν παραγίγνεσθαι ;
And why do Cebes and Simmias come to me from Thebes?

1466	εὖ ἴσθι ὅτι ταῦτα οὐκ ἄνευ πολλῶν φίλτρων τε καὶ ἐπῳδῶν καὶ ἰύγγων ἐστί .
I assure you these things don’t happen without the help of many potions and spells and magic wheels.

1467	χρῆσον τοίνυν μοι , ἔφη , τὴν ἴυγγα , ἵνα ἐπὶ σοὶ πρῶτον ἕλκω αὐτήν .
Do lend me your wheel, that I may turn it first to draw you.

1468	ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐκ αὐτὸς ἕλκεσθαι πρὸς σὲ βούλομαι , ἀλλὰ σὲ πρὸς ἐμὲ πορεύεσθαι .
But of course I don’t want to be drawn to you: I want you to come to me.

1469	ἀλλὰ πορεύσομαι , ἔφη ·
Oh, I’ll come: only mind you welcome me.

1470	μόνον ὑποδέχου .
Only mind you welcome me.

1471	ἀλλ’ ὑποδέξομαί σε , ἔφη , ἂν μή τις φιλωτέρα σου ἔνδον ᾖ .
Oh, you shall be welcome — unless there’s a dearer girl with me!

1472	Ἐπιγένην δὲ τῶν συνόντων τινὰ νέον τε ὄντα καὶ τὸ σῶμα κακῶς ἔχοντα ἰδών , ὡς ἰδιωτικῶς , ἔφη , τὸ σῶμα ἔχεις , ὦ Ἐπίγενες .
On noticing that Epigenes, one of his companions, was in poor condition, for a young man, he said: You look as if you need exercise, Epigenes.

1473	καὶ ὅς , ἰδιώτης γάρ , ἔφη , εἰμί , ὦ Σώκρατες .
Well, he replied, I’m not an athlete, Socrates.

1474	οὐδέν γε μᾶλλον , ἔφη , τῶν ἐν Ὀλυμπίᾳ μελλόντων ἀγωνίζεσθαι ·
Just as much as the competitors entered for Olympia, he retorted.

1475	ἢ δοκεῖ σοι μικρὸς εἶναι ὁ περὶ τῆς ψυχῆς πρὸς τοὺς πολεμίους ἀγών , ὃν Ἀθηναῖοι θήσουσιν , ὅταν τύχωσι ;
Or do you count the life and death struggle with their enemies, upon which, it may be, the Athenians will enter, but a small thing?

1476	καὶ μὴν οὐκ ὀλίγοι μὲν διὰ τὴν τοῦ σώματος καχεξίαν ἀποθνῄσκουσί τε ἐν τοῖς πολεμικοῖς κινδύνοις καὶ αἰσχρῶς σῴζονται ·
Why, many, thanks to their bad condition, lose their life in the perils of war or save it disgracefully.

1477	πολλοὶ δὲ δι’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο ζῶντές τε ἁλίσκονται καὶ ἁλόντες ἤτοι δουλεύουσι τὸν λοιπὸν βίον , ἐὰν οὕτω τύχωσι , τὴν χαλεπωτάτην δουλείαν ἢ εἰς τὰς ἀνάγκας τὰς ἀλγεινοτάτας ἐμπεσόντες καὶ ἐκτείσαντες ἐνίοτε πλείω τῶν ὑπαρχόντων αὐτοῖς τὸν λοιπὸν βίον ἐνδεεῖς τῶν ἀναγκαίων ὄντες καὶ κακοπαθοῦντες διαζῶσι ·
Many, just for this same cause, are taken prisoners, and then either pass the rest of their days, perhaps, in slavery of the hardest kind, or, after meeting with cruel sufferings and paying, sometimes, more than they have, live on, destitute and in misery.

1478	πολλοὶ δὲ δόξαν αἰσχρὰν κτῶνται διὰ τὴν τοῦ σώματος ἀδυναμίαν δοκοῦντες ἀποδειλιᾶν .
Many, again, by their bodily weakness earn infamy, being thought cowards.

1479	ἢ καταφρονεῖς τῶν ἐπιτιμίων τῆς καχεξίας τούτων , καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἂν οἴει φέρειν τὰ τοιαῦτα ;
Or do you despise these, the rewards of bad condition, and think that you can easily endure such things?

1480	καὶ μὴν οἶμαί γε πολλῷ ῥᾴω καὶ ἡδίω τούτων εἶναι ἃ δεῖ ὑπομένειν τὸν ἐπιμελόμενον τῆς τοῦ σώματος εὐεξίας .
And yet I suppose that what has to be borne by anyone who takes care to keep his body in good condition is far lighter and far pleasanter than these things.

1481	ἢ ὑγιεινότερόν τε καὶ εἰς τ- ἄλλα χρησιμώ

τερον νομίζεις εἶναι τὴν καχεξίαν τῆς εὐεξίας , ἢ τῶν διὰ τὴν εὐεξίαν γιγνομένων καταφρονεῖς ;
Or is it that you think bad condition healthier and generally more serviceable than good, or do you despise the effects of good condition?

1482	καὶ μὴν πάντα γε τ- ἐναντία συμβαίνει τοῖς εὖ τὰ σώματα ἔχουσιν ἢ τοῖς κακῶς .
And yet the results of physical fitness are the direct opposite of those that follow from unfitness.

1483	καὶ γὰρ ὑγιαίνουσιν οἱ τὰ σώματα εὖ ἔχοντες καὶ ἰσχύουσι ·
The fit are healthy and strong;

1484	καὶ πολλοὶ μὲν διὰ τοῦτο ἐκ τῶν πολεμικῶν ἀγώνων σῴζονταί τε εὐσχημόνως καὶ τὰ δεινὰ πάντα διαφεύγουσι , πολλοὶ δὲ φίλοις τε βοηθοῦσι καὶ τὴν πατρίδα εὐεργετοῦσι καὶ διὰ ταῦτα χάριτός τε ἀξιοῦνται καὶ δόξαν μεγάλην κτῶνται καὶ τιμῶν καλλίστων τυγχάνουσι καὶ διὰ ταῦτα τόν τε λοιπὸν βίον ἥδιον καὶ κάλλιον διαζῶσι καὶ τοῖς ἑαυτῶν παισὶ καλλίους ἀφορμὰς εἰς τὸν βίον καταλείπουσιν .
and many, as a consequence, save themselves decorously on the battle-field and escape all the dangers of war; many help friends and do good to their country and for this cause earn gratitude; get great glory and gain very high honours, and for this cause live henceforth a pleasanter and better life, and leave to their children better means of winning a livelihood.

1485	οὔτοι χρή , ὅτι οὐκ ἀσκεῖ δημοσίᾳ ἡ πόλις τὰ πρὸς τὸν πόλεμον , διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἰδίᾳ ἀμελεῖν , ἀλλὰ μηδὲν ἧττον ἐπιμελεῖσθαι .
I tell you, because military training is not publicly recognised by the state, you must not make that an excuse for being a whit less careful in attending to it yourself.

1486	εὖ γὰρ ἴσθι ὅτι οὐδὲ ἐν ἄλλῳ οὐδενὶ ἀγῶνι οὐδὲ ἐν πράξει οὐδεμιᾷ μεῖον ἕξεις διὰ τὸ βέλτιον τὸ σῶμα παρεσκευάσθαι ·
For you may rest assured that there is no kind of struggle, apart from war, and no undertaking in which you will be worse off by keeping your body in better fettle.

1487	πρὸς πάντα γὰρ ὅσα πράττουσιν ἄνθρωποι χρήσιμον τὸ σῶμά ἐστιν ·
For in everything that men do the body is useful;

1488	ἐν πάσαις δὲ ταῖς τοῦ σώματος χρείαις πολὺ διαφέρει ὡς βέλτιστα τὸ σῶμα ἔχειν ·
and in all uses of the body it is of great importance to be in as high a state of physical efficiency as possible.

1489	ἐπεὶ καὶ ἐν ᾧ δοκεῖ ἐλαχίστη σώματος χρεία εἶναι , ἐν τῷ διανοεῖσθαι , τίς οὐκ οἶδεν ὅτι καὶ ἐν τούτῳ πολλοὶ μεγάλα σφάλλονται διὰ τὸ μὴ ὑγιαίνειν τὸ σῶμα ;
Why, even in the process of thinking, in which the use of the body seems to be reduced to a minimum, it is matter of common knowledge that grave mistakes may often be traced to bad health.

1490	καὶ λήθη δὲ καὶ ἀθυμία καὶ δυσκολία καὶ μανία πολλάκις πολλοῖς διὰ τὴν τοῦ σώματος καχεξίαν εἰς τὴν διάνοιαν ἐμπίπτουσιν οὕτως ὥστε καὶ τὰς ἐπιστήμας ἐκβάλλειν .
And because the body is in a bad condition, loss of memory, depression, discontent, insanity often assail the mind so violently as to drive whatever knowledge it contains clean out of it.

1491	τοῖς δὲ τὰ σώμ

ατα εὖ ἔχουσι πολλὴ ἀσφάλεια καὶ οὐδεὶς κίνδυνος διά γε τὴν τοῦ σώματος καχεξίαν τοιοῦτόν τι παθεῖν , εἰκὸς δὲ μᾶλλον πρὸς τὰ ἐναντία τῶν διὰ τὴν καχεξίαν γιγνομένων καὶ τὴν εὐεξίαν χρήσιμον εἶναι ·
But a sound and healthy body is a strong protection to a man, and at least there is no danger then of such a calamity happening to him through physical weakness: on the contrary, it is likely that his sound condition will serve to produce effects the opposite of those that arise from bad condition.

1492	καίτοι τῶν γε τοῖς εἰρημένοις ἐναντίων ἕνεκα τί οὐκ ἄν τις νοῦν ἔχων ὑπομείνειεν ;
And surely a man of sense would submit to anything to obtain the effects that are the opposite of those mentioned in my list.

1493	αἰσχρὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ διὰ τὴν ἀμέλειαν γηρᾶναι , πρὶν ἰδεῖν ἑαυτὸν ποῖος ἂν κάλλιστος καὶ κράτιστος τῷ σώματι γένοιτο ·
Besides, it is a disgrace to grow old through sheer carelessness before seeing what manner of man you may become by developing your bodily strength and beauty to their highest limit.

1494	ταῦτα δὲ οὐκ ἔστιν ἰδεῖν ἀμελοῦντα ·
But you cannot see that, if you are careless; for it will not come of its own accord.

1495	οὐ γὰρ ἐθέλει αὐτόματα γίγνεσθαι .
for it will not come of its own accord.

1496	ὀργιζομένου δέ ποτέ τινος , ὅτι προσειπών τινα χαίρειν οὐκ ἀντιπροσερρήθη , γελοῖον , ἔφη , τό , εἰ μὲν τὸ σῶμα κάκιον ἔχοντι ἀπήντησάς τῳ , μὴ ἂν ὀργίζεσθαι , ὅτι δὲ τὴν ψυχὴν ἀγροικοτέρως διακειμένῳ περιέτυχες , τοῦτό σε λυπεῖ .
Ridiculous! he exclaimed; you would not have been angry if you had met a man in worse health; and yet you are annoyed because you have come across someone with ruder manners!

1497	ἄλλου δὲ λέγοντος ὅτι ἀηδῶς ἐσθίοι , Ἀκουμενός , ἔφη , τούτου φάρμακον ἀγαθὸν διδάσκει .
On another who declared that he found no pleasure in eating: Acumenus, he said, has a good prescription for that ailment.

1498	ἐρομένου δέ , ποῖον ;
And when asked What? he answered,

1499	παύσασθαι ἐσθίοντα , ἔφη ·
Stop eating; and you will then find life pleasanter, cheaper, and healthier.

1500	καὶ ἥδιόν τε καὶ εὐτελέστερον καὶ ὑγιεινότερον διάξειν παυσάμενον .
and you will then find life pleasanter, cheaper, and healthier.

1501	ἄλλου δ’ αὖ λέγοντος ὅτι θερμὸν εἴη παρ’ ἑαυτῷ τὸ ὕδωρ ὃ πίνοι , ὅταν ἄρ’ , ἔφη , βούλῃ θερμῷ λούσασθαι , ἕτοιμον ἔσται σοι .
On yet another who complained that the drinking water at home was warm: Consequently, he said, when you want warm water to wash in, you will have it at hand.

1502	ἀλλὰ ψυχρόν , ἔφη , ἐστὶν ὥστε λούσασθαι .
But it’s too cold for washing, objected the other.

1503	ἆρ’ οὖν , ἔφη , καὶ οἱ οἰκέται σου ἄχθονται πίνοντές τε αὐτὸ καὶ λούμενοι αὐτῷ ;
Then do your servants complain when they use it both for drinking and washing?

1504	μὰ τὸν Δί’ , ἔφη ·
Oh no: indeed I have often felt surprised that they are content with it for both these purposes.

1505	ἀλλὰ καὶ πολλάκις τεθαύμακα ὡς ἡδέως αὐτῷ πρὸς ἀμφ

ότερα ταῦτα χρῶνται .
indeed I have often felt surprised that they are content with it for both these purposes.

1506	πότερον δέ , ἔφη , τὸ παρὰ σοὶ ὕδωρ θερμότερον πιεῖν ἐστιν ἢ τὸ ἐν Ἀσκληπιοῦ ;
Which is the warmer to drink, the water in your house or Epidaurus water?

1507	τὸ ἐν Ἀσκληπιοῦ , ἔφη .
Epidaurus water.

1508	πότερον δὲ λούσασθαι ψυχρότερον τὸ παρὰ σοὶ ἢ τὸ ἐν Ἀμφιαράου ;
And which is the colder to wash in, yours or Oropus water?

1509	τὸ ἐν Ἀμφιαράου , ἔφη .
Oropus water.

1510	ἐνθυμοῦ οὖν , ἔφη , ὅτι κινδυνεύεις δυσαρεστότερος εἶναι τῶν τε οἰκετῶν καὶ τῶν ἀρρωστούντων .
Then reflect that you are apparently harder to please than servants and invalids.

1511	κολάσαντος δέ τινος ἰσχυρῶς ἀκόλουθον , ἤρετο τί χαλεπαίνοι τῷ θεράποντι , ὅτι , ἔφη , ὀψοφαγίστατός τε ὢν βλακότατός ἐστι καὶ φιλαργυρώτατος ὢν ἀργότατος .
When someone punished his footman severely, he asked why he was angry with his man. "Because he’s a glutton and he’s a fool," said the other: "he’s rapacious and he’s lazy."

1512	ἤδη ποτὲ οὖν ἐπεσκέψω , πότερος πλειόνων πληγῶν δεῖται , σὺ ἢ ὁ θεράπων ;
"Have you ever considered, then, which deserves the more stripes, the master or the man?"

1513	φοβουμένου δέ τινος τὴν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν ὁδόν , τί , ἔφη , φοβῇ τὴν πορείαν ;
When someone was afraid of the journey to Olympia, he said: "Why do you fear the distance?"

1514	οὐ καὶ οἴκοι σχεδὸν ὅλην τὴν ἡμέραν περιπατεῖς ;
"When you are at home, don’t you spend most of the day in walking about?"

1515	καὶ ἐκεῖσε πορευόμενος περιπατήσας ἀριστήσεις , περιπατήσας δειπνήσεις καὶ ἀναπαύσῃ .
"On your way there you will take a walk before lunch, and another before dinner, and then take a rest."

1516	οὐκ οἶσθα ὅτι , εἰ ἐκτείναις τοὺς περιπάτους , οὓς ἐν πέντε ἢ ἓξ ἡμέραις περιπατεῖς , ῥᾳδίως ἂν Ἀθήνηθεν εἰς Ὀλυμπίαν ἀφίκοιο ;
"Don’t you know that if you put together the walks you take in five or six days, you can easily cover the distance from Athens to Olympia?"

1517	χαριέστερον δὲ καὶ προεξορμᾶν ἡμέρᾳ μιᾷ μᾶλλον ἢ ὑστερίζειν .
"It is more comfortable, too, to start a day early rather than a day late."

1518	τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἀναγκάζεσθαι περαιτέρω τοῦ μετρίου μηκύνειν τὰς ὁδοὺς χαλεπόν , τὸ δὲ μιᾷ ἡμέρᾳ πλείους πορευθῆναι πολλὴν ῥᾳστώνην παρέχει .
"Since to be forced to make

 the stages of the journey unduly long is unpleasant; but to take a day extra on the way makes easy going."

1519	κρεῖττον οὖν ἐν τῇ ὁρμῇ σπεύδειν ἢ ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ .
"So it is better to hurry over the start than on the road."

1520	ἄλλου δὲ λέγοντος ὡς παρετάθη μακρὰν ὁδὸν πορευθείς , ἤρετο αὐτὸν εἰ καὶ φορτίον ἔφερε , μὰ Δί’ οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη , ἀλλὰ τὸ ἱμάτιον .
When another said that he was worn out after a long journey, he asked him whether he had carried a load. "Oh no," said the man; "only my cloak."

1521	μόνος δ’ ἐπορεύου , ἔφη , ἢ καὶ ἀκόλουθός σοι ἠκολούθει ;
"Were you alone, or had you a footman with you?"

1522	ἠκολούθει , ἔφη .
"I had."

1523	πότερον κενός , ἔφη , ἢ φέρων τι ;
"Empty-handed or carrying anything?"

1524	φέρων νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , τά τε στρώματα καὶ τ- ἄλλα σκεύη .
"He carried the rugs and the rest of the baggage, of course."

1525	καὶ πῶς τι , ἔφη , ἀπήλλαχεν ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ ;
"And how has he come out of the journey?"

1526	ἐμοὶ μὲν δοκεῖ , ἔφη , βέλτιον ἐμοῦ .
"Better than I, so far as I can tell."

1527	τί οὖν ;
"Well then,"

1528	ἔφη , εἰ τὸ ἐκείνου φορτίον ἔδει σε φέρειν , πῶς ἂν οἴει διατεθῆναι ;
he said, "if you had been forced to carry his load, how would you have felt, do you suppose?"

1529	κακῶς νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη ·
"Bad, of course;"

1530	μᾶλλον δὲ οὐδ’ ἂν ἐδυνήθην κομίσαι .
"or rather, I couldn’t have done it."

1531	τὸ οὖν τοσούτῳ ἧττον τοῦ παιδὸς δύνασθαι πονεῖν πῶς ἠσκημένου δοκεῖ σοι ἀνδρὸς εἶναι ;
"Indeed! do you think a trained man ought to be so much less capable of work than his slave?"

1532	ὁπότε δὲ τῶν συνιόντων ἐπὶ δεῖπνον οἱ μὲν μικρὸν ὄψον , οἱ δὲ πολὺ φέροιεν , ἐκέλευεν ὁ Σωκράτης τὸν παῖδα τὸ μικρὸν ἢ εἰς τὸ κοινὸν τιθέναι ἢ διανέμειν ἑκάστῳ τὸ μέρος .
Whenever some of the members of a dining-club brought more meat than others, Socrates would tell the waiter either to put the small contribution into the common stock or to portion it out equally among the diners.

1533	οἱ οὖν τὸ πολὺ φέροντες ᾐσχύνοντο τό τε μὴ κοινωνεῖν τοῦ εἰς τὸ κοινὸν τιθεμένου καὶ τὸ μὴ ἀντιτιθέναι τὸ ἑαυτῶν ·
So the high batteners felt obliged not only to take their share of the pool, but to pool their own supplies in return;

1534	ἐτίθεσαν οὖν καὶ τὸ ἑαυτῶν εἰς τὸ κοινόν .
and so they put their own supplies also into the common stock.

1535	καὶ ἐπεὶ οὐδὲν πλέον εἶχον τῶν μικρὸν φερομένων , ἐπαύοντο πολλοῦ ὀψωνοῦντες .
And since they thus got no more than those who brought little with them, they gave up spending much on meat.

1536	καταμαθὼν δέ ποτε τῶν συνδειπνούντων τινὰ τοῦ μὲν σίτου πεπαυμένον , τὸ δὲ ὄψον αὐτὸ καθ’ αὑτὸ ἐσθίοντα , λόγου ὄντος περὶ ὀνομάτων , ἐφ’ οἵῳ ἔργῳ ἕκαστον εἴη , ἔχοιμεν ἄν , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες , εἰπεῖν , ἐπὶ ποίῳ ποτὲ ἔργῳ ἄνθρωπος ὀψοφάγος καλεῖται ;
He observed on one occasion that one of the company at dinner had ceased to take bread, and ate the meat by itself. Now the talk was of names and the actions to which they are properly applied. "Can we say, my friends," said Socrates, "what is the nature of the action for which a man is called greedy?

1537	ἐσθίουσι μὲν γὰρ δὴ πάντες ἐπὶ τῷ σίτῳ ὄψον , ὅταν παρῇ ·
For all, I presume, eat meat with their bread when they

 get the chance;

1538	ἀλλ’ οὐκ οἶμαί πω ἐπὶ τούτῳ γε ὀψοφάγοι καλοῦνται .
but I don’t think there is so far any reason for calling them greedy?

1539	οὐ γὰρ οὖν , ἔφη τις τῶν παρόντων .
"No, certainly not," said one of the company.

1540	τί γάρ ;
"Well, suppose he

1541	ἔφη , ἐάν τις ἄνευ τοῦ σίτου τὸ ὄψον αὐτὸ ἐσθίῃ , μὴ ἀσκήσεως , ἀλλ’ ἡδονῆς ἕνεκα , πότερον ὀψοφάγος εἶναι δοκεῖ ἢ οὔ ;
eats the meat alone, without the bread, not because he’s in training, but to tickle his palate, does he seem a greedy fellow or not?"

1542	σχολῇ γ’ ἄν , ἔφη , ἄλλος τις ὀψοφάγος εἴη .
"If not, it’s hard to say who does," was the reply.

1543	καί τις ἄλλος τῶν παρόντων , ὁ δὲ μικρῷ σίτῳ , ἔφη , πολὺ ὄψον ἐπεσθίων ;
Here another of the company queried, "And he who eats a scrap of bread with a large helping of meat?"

1544	ἐμοὶ μέν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , καὶ οὗτος δοκεῖ δικαίως ἂν ὀψοφάγος καλεῖσθαι ·
"He too seems to me to deserve the epithet," said Socrates.

1545	καὶ ὅταν γε οἱ ἄλλοι ἄνθρωποι τοῖς θεοῖς εὔχωνται πολυκαρπίαν , εἰκότως ἂν οὗτος πολυοψίαν εὔχοιτο .
"Aye, and when others pray for a good wheat harvest, he, presumably, would pray for a good meat supply."

1546	ταῦτα δὲ τοῦ Σωκράτους εἰπόντος , νομίσας ὁ νεανίσκος εἰς αὑτὸν εἰρῆσθαι τὰ λεχθέντα τὸ μὲν ὄψον οὐκ ἐπαύσατο ἐσθίων , ἄρτον δὲ προσέλαβε .
The young man, guessing that these remarks of Socrates applied to him, did not stop eating his meat, but took some bread with it.

1547	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης καταμαθών , παρατηρεῖτ’ , ἔφη , τοῦτον οἱ πλησίον , ὁπότερα τῷ σίτῳ ὄψῳ ἢ τῷ ὄψῳ σίτῳ χρήσεται .
When Socrates observed this, he cried: "Watch the fellow, you who are near him, and see whether he treats the bread as his meat or the meat as his bread."

1548	ἄλλον δέ ποτε τῶν συνδείπνων ἰδὼν ἐπὶ τῷ ἑνὶ ψωμῷ πλειόνων ὄψων γευόμενον , ἆρα γένοιτ’ ἄν , ἔφη , πολυτελεστέρα ὀψοποιία ἢ μᾶλλον τὰ ὄψα λυμαινομένη , ἢ ἣν ὀψοποιεῖται ὁ ἅμα πολλὰ ἐσθίων καὶ ἅμα παντοδαπὰ ἡδύσματα εἰς τὸ στόμα λαμβάνων ;
On another occasion he noticed one of the company at dinner tasting several dishes with each bite of bread. "Can you imagine," he asked, "a meal more extravagant and more ruinous to the victuals than his who eats many things together, and crams all sorts of sauces into his mouth at once?

1549	πλείω μέν γε τῶν ὀψοποιῶν συμμιγνύων πολυτελέστερα ποιεῖ ·
At any rate by mixing more ingredients than the cooks, he adds to the cost,

1550	ἃ δὲ ἐκεῖνοι μὴ συμμιγνύουσιν , ὡς οὐχ ἁρμόττοντα , ὁ συμμιγνύων , εἴπερ ἐκεῖνοι ὀρθῶς ποιοῦσιν , ἁμαρτάνει τε καὶ καταλύει τὴν τέχνην αὐτῶν .
and since he mixes ingredients that they regard as unsuitable in a mixture, if they are right, then he is wrong and is ruining their art.

1551	καίτοι πῶς οὐ γελοῖόν ἐστι παρασκευάζεσθαι μὲν ὀψοποιο

ὺς τοὺς ἄριστα ἐπισταμένους , αὐτὸν δὲ μηδ’ ἀντιποιούμενον τῆς τέχνης ταύτης τὰ ὑπ’ ἐκείνων ποιούμενα μετατιθέναι ;
Yet it is surely ridiculous for a master to obtain highly skilled cooks, and then, though he claims no knowledge of the art, to alter their confections?

1552	καὶ ἄλλο δέ τι προσγίγνεται τῷ ἅμα πολλὰ ἐσθίειν ἐθισθέντι ·
There’s another drawback, too, attaching to the habit of eating many things together.

1553	μὴ παρόντων γὰρ πολλῶν μειονεκτεῖν ἄν τι δοκοίη ποθῶν τὸ σύνηθες ·
For if many dishes are not provided, one seems to go short because one misses the usual variety;

1554	ὁ δὲ συνεθισθεὶς τὸν ἕνα ψωμὸν ἑνὶ ὄψῳ προπέμπειν , ὅτε μὴ παρείη πολλά , δύναιτ’ ἂν ἀλύπως τῷ ἑνὶ χρῆσθαι .
whereas he who is accustomed to take one kind of meat along with one bit of bread can make the best of one dish when more are not forthcoming.

1555	ἔλεγε δὲ καὶ ὡς τὸ εὐωχεῖσθαι ἐν τῇ Ἀθηναίων γλώττῃ ἐσθίειν καλοῖτο ·
He used to say too that the term "good feeding" in Attic was a synonym for "eating."

1556	τὸ δὲ εὖ προσκεῖσθαι ἔφη ἐπὶ τῷ ταῦτα ἐσθίειν , ἃ μήτε τὴν ψυχὴν μήτε τὸ σῶμα λυποίη μηδὲ δυσεύρετα εἴη ·
The "good" in the compound implied the eating of food that could harm neither body nor soul and was not hard to come by.

1557	ὥστε καὶ τὸ εὐωχεῖσθαι τοῖς κοσμίως διαιτωμένοις ἀνετίθει .
Thus he attributed even good feeding to sober livers.

1558	οὕτω δὲ Σωκράτης ἦν ἐν παντὶ πράγματι καὶ πάντα τρόπον ὠφέλιμος , ὥστε τῷ σκοπουμένῳ τοῦτο καὶ εἰ μετρίως αἰσθανομένῳ φανερὸν εἶναι ὅτι οὐδὲν ὠφελιμώτερον ἦν τοῦ Σωκράτει συνεῖναι καὶ μετ’ ἐκείνου διατρίβειν ὁπουοῦν καὶ ἐν ὁτῳοῦν πράγματι ·
Socrates was so useful in all circumstances and in all ways, that any observer gifted with ordinary perception can see that nothing was more useful than the companionship of Socrates, and time spent with him in any place and in any circumstances.

1559	ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ ἐκείνου μεμνῆσθαι μὴ παρόντος οὐ μικρὰ ὠφέλει τοὺς εἰωθότας τε αὐτῷ συνεῖναι καὶ ἀποδεχομένους ἐκεῖνον .
The very recollection of him in absence brought no small good to his constant companions and followers.

1560	καὶ γὰρ παίζων οὐδὲν ἧττον ἢ σπουδάζων ἐλυσιτέλει τοῖς συνδιατρίβουσι .
for even in his light moods they gained no less from his society than when he was serious.

1561	πολλάκις γὰρ ἔφη μὲν ἄν τινος ἐρᾶν , φανερὸς δ’ ἦν οὐ τῶν τὰ σώματα πρὸς ὥραν , ἀλλὰ τῶν τ

ὰς ψυχὰς πρὸς ἀρετὴν εὖ πεφυκότων ἐφιέμενος .
Thus he would often say he was "in love"; but clearly his heart was set not on those who were fair to outward view, but on those whose souls excelled in goodness.

1562	ἐτεκμαίρετο δὲ τὰς ἀγαθὰς φύσεις ἐκ τοῦ ταχύ τε μανθάνειν οἷς προσέχοιεν καὶ μνημονεύειν ἃ ἂν μάθοιεν καὶ ἐπιθυμεῖν τῶν μαθημάτων πάντων δι’ ὧν ἔστιν οἶκόν τε καλῶς οἰκεῖν καὶ πόλιν καὶ τὸ ὅλον ἀνθρώποις τε καὶ τοῖς ἀνθρωπίνοις πράγμασιν εὖ χρῆσθαι ·
These excellent beings he recognised by their quickness to learn whatever subject they studied, ability to remember what they learned, and desire for every kind of knowledge on which depend good management of a household and estate and tactful dealing with men and the affairs of men.

1563	τοὺς γὰρ τοιούτους ἡγεῖτο παιδευθέντας οὐκ ἂν μόνον αὐτούς τε εὐδαίμονας εἶναι καὶ τοὺς ἑαυτῶν οἴκους καλῶς οἰκεῖν , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους καὶ πόλεις δύνασθαι εὐδαίμονας ποιεῖν .
For education would make such beings not only happy in themselves, and successful in the management of their households, but capable of conferring happiness on their fellow-men and on states alike.

1564	οὐ τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον ἐπὶ πάντας ᾔει , ἀλλὰ τοὺς μὲν οἰομένους φύσει ἀγαθοὺς εἶναι , μαθήσεως δὲ καταφρονοῦντας ἐδίδασκεν ὅτι αἱ ἄρισται δοκοῦσαι εἶναι φύσεις μάλιστα παιδείας δέονται , ἐπιδεικνύων τῶν τε ἵππων τοὺς εὐφυεστάτους , θυμοειδεῖς τε καὶ σφοδροὺς ὄντας , εἰ μὲν ἐκ νέων δαμασθεῖεν , εὐχρηστοτάτους καὶ ἀρίστους γιγνομένους , εἰ δὲ ἀδάμαστοι γένοιντο , δυσκαθεκτοτάτους καὶ φαυλοτάτους ·
To those who thought themselves possessed of natural endowments and despised learning, he explained that the greater the natural gifts, the greater is the need of education; pointing out that thoroughbreds by their spirit and mettle develop into serviceable and splendid creatures, if they are broken in as colts, but if unbroken, prove intractable and sorry jades.

1565	καὶ τῶν κυνῶν τῶν εὐφυεστάτων , φιλοπόνων τε οὐσῶν καὶ ἐπιθετικῶν τοῖς θηρίοις , τὰς μὲν καλῶς ἀχθείσας ἀρίστας γίγνεσθαι πρὸς τὰς θήρας καὶ χρησιμωτάτας , ἀναγώγους δὲ γιγνομένας ματαίους τε καὶ μανιώδεις καὶ δυσπειθεστάτας .
and high-bred puppies, keen workers and good tacklers of game, make first-rate hounds and useful dogs, if well trained, but, if untrained, turn out stupid, crazy, disobedient brutes.

1566	ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων τοὺς εὐφυεστάτους , ἐρρωμενεστάτους τε ταῖς ψυχαῖς ὄντας καὶ ἐξεργαστικωτάτους ὧν ἂν ἐγχειρῶσι , παιδευθέντας μὲν καὶ μαθόντας ἃ δεῖ πράττειν , ἀρίστους τε καὶ ὠφελιμωτάτους γίγνεσθαι ·
It is the same with human beings. The most

 highly gifted, the youths of ardent soul, capable of doing whatever they attempt, if educated and taught their duty grow into excellent and useful men;

1567	πλεῖστα γὰρ καὶ μέγιστα ἀγαθὰ ἐργάζεσθαι ·
for manifold and great are their good deeds.

1568	ἀπαιδεύτους δὲ καὶ ἀμαθεῖς γενομένους κακίστους τε καὶ βλαβερωτάτους γίγνεσθαι ·
But untrained and untaught, these same become utterly evil and mischievous;

1569	κρίνειν γὰρ οὐκ ἐπισταμένους ἃ δεῖ πράττειν , πολλάκις πονηροῖς ἐπιχειρεῖν πράγμασι , μεγαλείους δὲ καὶ σφοδροὺς ὄντας δυσκαθέκτους τε καὶ δυσαποτρέπτους εἶναι , δι’ ὃ πλεῖστα καὶ μέγιστα κακὰ ἐργάζεσθαι .
for without knowledge to discern their duty, they often put their hand to vile deeds, and through the very grandeur and vehemence of their nature, they are uncontrollable and intractable: therefore manifold and great are their evil deeds.

1570	τοὺς δ’ ἐπὶ πλούτῳ μέγα φρονοῦντας καὶ νομίζοντας οὐδὲν προσδεῖσθαι παιδείας , ἐξαρκέσειν δὲ σφίσι τὸν πλοῦτον οἰομένους πρὸς τὸ διαπράττεσθαί τε ὅ τι ἂν βούλωνται καὶ τιμᾶσθαι ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐφρένου λέγων ὅτι μῶρος μὲν εἴη , εἴ τις οἴεται μὴ μαθὼν τά τε ὠφέλιμα καὶ τὰ βλαβερὰ τῶν πραγμάτων διαγνώσεσθαι , μῶρος δ’ , εἴ τις μὴ διαγιγνώσκων μὲν ταῦτα , διὰ δὲ τὸν πλοῦτον ὅ τι ἂν βούληται ποριζόμενος οἴεται δυνήσεσθαι τὰ συμφέροντα πράττειν , ἠλίθιος δ’ , εἴ τις μὴ δυνάμενος τὰ συμφέροντα πράττειν εὖ τε πράττειν οἴεται καὶ τὰ πρὸς τὸν βίον αὐτῷ ἢ καλῶς ἢ ἱκανῶς παρεσκευάσθαι , ἠλίθιος δὲ καὶ εἴ τις οἴεται διὰ τὸν πλοῦτον , μηδὲν ἐπιστάμενος , δόξειν τι ἀγαθὸς εἶναι ἤ , μηδὲν ἀγαθὸς εἶναι δοκῶν , εὐδοκιμήσειν .
Those who prided themselves on riches and thought they had no need of education, supposing that their wealth would suffice them for gaining the objects of their wishes and winning honour among men, he admonished thus. <said direct="true">Only a fool," he said, "can think it possible to distinguish between things useful and things harmful without learning: only a fool can think that without distinguishing these he will get all he wants by means of his wealth and be able to do what is expedient: only a simpleton can think that without the power to do what is expedient he is doing well and has made good or sufficient provision for his life: only a simpleton can think that by his wealth alone without knowledge he will be reputed good at something, or will enjoy a good reputation without being reputed good at anything in particular."

1571	τοῖς δὲ νομίζουσι παιδείας τε τῆς ἀρίστης τετυχηκέναι καὶ μέγα φρονοῦσιν ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ ὡς προσεφέρετο νῦν διηγήσομαι .
I will now show his method of dealing with those who thought they had received the best education, and prided themselves on wisdom.

1572	καταμαθὼν γὰρ Εὐθύδημον τὸν καλὸν γράμματα πολλὰ συνειλεγμένον ποιητῶν τε καὶ σοφιστῶν τῶν εὐδοκιμωτάτων καὶ ἐκ τούτων ἤδη τε νομίζοντα διαφέρειν τῶν ἡλικιωτῶν ἐν σοφίᾳ καὶ μεγάλας ἐλπίδας ἔχοντα πάντων διοίσειν τῷ δύνασθαι λέγειν τε καὶ πράττειν , πρῶτον μέν , αἰσθανόμενος αὐτὸν διὰ νεότητα οὔπω εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν εἰσιόντα , εἰ δέ τι βούλοιτο διαπράξασθαι , καθίζοντα εἰς ἡνιοποιεῖόν τι τῶν ἐγγὺς τῆς ἀγορᾶς , εἰς τοῦτο καὶ αὐτὸς ᾔει τῶν μεθ’ ἑαυτοῦ τινας ἔχων .
He was informed that Euthydemus, the handsome, had formed a large collection of the works of celebrated poets and professors, and therefore supposed himself to be a prodigy of wisdom for his age, and was confident of surpassing all competitors in power of speech and action. At present, Socrates observed, he did not enter the Market-place owing to his youth, but when he wanted to get anything done, he would be found sitting in a saddler’s shop near the Market. So, to make an opening, Socrates went to this shop with some of his companions.

1573	καὶ πρῶτον μὲν πυνθανομένου τινὸς πότερον Θεμιστοκλῆς διὰ συνουσίαν τινὸς τῶν σοφῶν ἢ φύσει τοσοῦτον διήνεγκε τῶν πολιτῶν , ὥστε πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἀποβλέπειν τὴν πόλιν , ὅτε σπουδαίου ἀνδρὸς δεηθείη , ὁ Σωκράτης βουλόμενος κινεῖν τὸν Εὐθύδημ

ον εὔηθες ἔφη εἶναι τὸ οἴεσθαι τὰς μὲν ὀλίγου ἀξίας τέχνας μὴ γίγνεσθαι σπουδαίους ἄνευ διδασκάλων ἱκανῶν , τὸ δὲ προεστάναι πόλεως , πάντων ἔργων μέγιστον ὄν , ἀπὸ τ- αὐτομάτου παραγίγνεσθαι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις .
At the first visit, one of them asked: "Was it by constant intercourse with some wise man or by natural ability that Themistocles stood out among his fellow-citizens as the man to whom the people naturally looked when they felt the want of a great leader?" In order to set Euthydemus thinking, Socrates said: "If in the minor arts great achievement is impossible without competent masters, surely it is absurd to imagine that the art of statesmanship, the greatest of all accomplishments, comes to a man of its own accord."

1574	πάλιν δέ ποτε παρόντος τοῦ Εὐθυδήμου , ὁρῶν αὐτὸν ἀποχωροῦντα τῆς συνεδρίας καὶ φυλαττόμενον μὴ δόξῃ τὸν Σωκράτην θαυμάζειν ἐπὶ σοφίᾳ , ὅτι μέν , ἔφη , ὦ ἄνδρες , Εὐθύδημος οὑτοσὶ ἐν ἡλικίᾳ γενόμενος , τῆς πόλεως λόγον περί τινος προτιθείσης , οὐκ ἀφέξεται τοῦ συμβουλεύειν , εὔδηλον ἐξ ὧν ἐπιτηδεύει ·
Some time afterwards, meeting Euthydemus again, he saw that he was reluctant to join the circle and anxious not to betray any admiration for the wisdom of Socrates: "Well, gentlemen," said he, "when our friend Euthydemus has attained his full powers, and some question of policy is before the Assembly, he won’t be backward in offering advice: that is obvious from his behaviour. I fancy he has prepared a noble exordium to his addresses, with due care not to give the impression that he is indebted to anyone for his knowledge. No doubt he will begin his speech with this introduction:"

1575	δοκεῖ δέ μοι καλὸν προοίμιον τῶν δημηγοριῶν παρασκευάσασθαι φυλαττόμενος μὴ δόξῃ μανθάνειν τι παρά του .
I fancy he has prepared a noble exordium to his addresses, with due care not to give the impression that he is indebted to anyone for his knowledge.

1576	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι λέγειν ἀρχόμενος ὧδε προοιμιάσεται ·
No doubt he will begin his speech with this introduction:

1577	"παρ’ οὐδενὸς μὲν πώποτε, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, οὐδὲν ἔμαθον, οὐδ’ ἀκούων τινὰς εἶναι λέγειν τε καὶ πράττειν ἱκανοὺς ἐζήτησα τούτοις ἐντυχεῖν, οὐδ’ ἐπεμελήθην τοῦ διδάσκαλόν τινά μοι γενέσθαι τῶν ἐπισταμένων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τ- ἐναντία."
"Men of Athens, I have never yet learnt anything from anyone, nor when I have been told of any man’s ability in speech and in action, have I sought to meet him, nor have I been at pains to find a teacher among the men who know. On the contrary, I have constantly avoided learning anything of anyone, and even the appearance of it."

1578	διατετέλεκα γὰρ φεύγων οὐ μόνον τὸ μανθάνειν τι παρά τινος, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ δόξαι.
"Nevertheless, I shall recommend to your consideration anything that comes into my head."

1579	ὅμως δὲ ὅ τι ἂν ἀπὸ τ- αὐτομάτου ἐπίῃ μοι συμβουλεύσω ὑμῖν."
"Nevertheless, I shall recommend to your consideration anything that comes into my head."

1580	ἁρμόσειε δ’ ἂν οὕτω προοιμιάζεσθαι καὶ τοῖς βουλομένοις παρὰ τῆς πόλεως ἰατρικὸν ἔργον λαβεῖν.
"This exordium might be adapted so as to suit candidates for the office of public physician."

1581	ἐπιτήδειόν γ’ ἂν αὐτοῖς εἴη τοῦ λόγου ἄρχεσθαι ἐντεῦθεν.
"They might begin their speeches in this strain."

1582	"παρ’ οὐδενὸς μὲν πώποτε, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, τὴν ἰατρικὴν τέχνην ἔμαθον, οὐδ’ ἐζήτησα διδάσκαλον ἐμαυτῷ γενέσθαι τῶν ἰατρῶν οὐδένα."
"Men of Athens, I have never yet studied medicine, nor sought to find a teacher among our physicians."

1583	διατετέλεκα γὰρ φυλαττόμενος οὐ μόνον τὸ μαθεῖν τι παρὰ τῶν ἰατρῶν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ δόξαι μεμαθηκέναι τὴν τέχνην

 ταύτην.
"For I have constantly avoided learning anything from the physicians, and even the appearance of having studied their art."

1584	ὅμως δέ μοι τὸ ἰατρικὸν ἔργον δότε.
"Nevertheless I ask you to appoint me to the office of a physician, and I will endeavour to learn by experimenting on you."

1585	πειράσομαι γὰρ ἐν ὑμῖν ἀποκινδυνεύων μανθάνειν.
"I will endeavour to learn by experimenting on you."

1586	πάντες οὖν οἱ παρόντες ἐγέλασαν ἐπὶ τῷ προοιμίῳ.
"The exordium set all the company laughing."

1587	ἐπεὶ δὲ φανερὸς ἦν ὁ Εὐθύδημος ἤδη μὲν οἷς ὁ Σωκράτης λέγοι προσέχων , ἔτι δὲ φυλαττόμενος αὐτός τι φθέγγεσθαι καὶ νομίζων τῇ σιωπῇ σωφροσύνης δόξαν περιβάλλεσθαι , τότε ὁ Σωκράτης βουλόμενος αὐτὸν παῦσαι τούτου , θαυμαστὸν γάρ , ἔφη , τί ποτε οἱ βουλόμενοι κιθαρίζειν ἢ αὐλεῖν ἢ ἱππεύειν ἢ ἄλλο τι τῶν τοιούτων ἱκανοὶ γενέσθαι πειρῶνται ὡς συνεχέστατα ποιεῖν ὅ τι ἂν βούλωνται δυνατοὶ γενέσθαι , καὶ οὐ καθ’ ἑαυτούς , ἀλλὰ παρὰ τοῖς ἀρίστοις δοκοῦσιν εἶναι , πάντα ποιοῦντες καὶ ὑπομένοντες ἕνεκα τοῦ μηδὲν ἄνευ τῆς ἐκείνων γνώμης ποιεῖν , ὡς οὐκ ἂν ἄλλως ἀξιόλογοι γενόμενοι ·
"Now when it became evident that Euthydemus had gained the attention of Socrates, but that Euthydemus still avoided breaking silence himself, and thought that he assumed an air of prudence by remaining dumb."
"Socrates wanted to put an end to that affectation. 'How strange it is,' he said, 'that those who want to play the harp or the flute, or to ride or to get skill in any similar accomplishment, work hard at the art they mean to master, and not by themselves but under the tuition of the most eminent professors, doing and bearing anything in their anxiety to do nothing without their teachers’ guidance, just because that is the only way to become proficient: 

1588	τῶν δὲ βουλομένων δυνατῶν γενέσθαι λέγειν τε καὶ πράττειν τὰ πολιτικὰ νομίζουσί τινες ἄνευ παρασκευῆς καὶ ἐπιμελείας αὐτόματοι ἐξαίφνης δυνατοὶ ταῦτα ποιεῖν ἔσεσθαι.
and yet, among those who want to shine as speakers in the Assembly and as statesmen, there are some who think that they will be able to do so on a sudden, by instinct, without training or study.'"

1589	καίτοι γε τοσούτῳ ταῦτα ἐκείνων δυσκατεργαστότερα φαίνεται, ὅσῳπερ πλειόνων περὶ ταῦτα πραγματευομένων ἐλάττους οἱ κατεργαζόμενοι γίγνονται.
"Yet surely these arts are much the harder to learn; for many more are interested in them and far fewer succeed."

1590	δῆλον οὖν ὅτι καὶ ἐπιμελείας δέονται πλείονος καὶ ἰσχυροτέρας οἱ τούτων ἐφιέμενοι ἢ οἱ ἐκείνων.
"Clearly then these arts demand a longer and more intense application than the others."

1591	κατ’ ἀρχὰς μὲν οὖν ἀκούοντος Εὐθυδήμου τοιούτους λόγους ἔλεγε Σωκράτης.
"For a time, then, Socrates continued to talk in this strain, while Euthydemus listened."

1592	ὡς δ’ ᾔσθετο αὐτὸν ἑτοιμότερον ὑπομένοντα, ὅτε διαλέγοιτο, καὶ προθυμότερον ἀκούοντα, μόνος ἦλθεν εἰς τὸ ἡνιοποιεῖον, παρακαθεζομένου δ’ αὐτῷ τοῦ Εὐθυδήμου.
"But on finding him more tolerant of his conversation and more attentive, Socrates went alone to the saddler’s; and when Euthydemus had taken a seat beside him."

1593	εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Εὐθύδημε, τῷ ὄντι, ὥσπερ ἐγὼ ἀκούω, πολλὰ γράμματα συνῆχας τῶν λεγομένων σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν γεγονέναι;
"He said: 'Tell me, Euthydemus, am I rightly informed that you have a large collection of books written by the wise men of the past, as they are called?'"

1594	καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος, νὴ τὸν Δί', ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες.
"By Zeus, yes, Socrates," answered he.

1595	καὶ ἔτι γε συνάγω, ἕως ἂν κτήσωμαι ὡς ἂν δύνωμαι πλεῖστα.
"And I am still adding to it, to make it as complete as possible."

1596	νὴ τὴν Ἥραν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἄγαμαί γέ σου, διότι οὐκ ἀργυρίου καὶ χρυσίου προείλ

ου θησαυροὺς κεκτῆσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ σοφίας.
"By Hera, I do admire you for valuing the treasures of wisdom above gold and silver."

1597	δῆλον γὰρ ὅτι νομίζεις ἀργύριον καὶ χρυσίον οὐδὲν βελτίους ποιεῖν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους, τὰς δὲ τῶν σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν γνώμας ἀρετῇ πλουτίζειν τοὺς κεκτημένους.
"For you are evidently of opinion that, while gold and silver cannot make men better, the thoughts of the wise enrich their possessors with virtue."

1598	καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος ἔχαιρεν ἀκούων ταῦτα, νομίζων δοκεῖν τῷ Σωκράτει ὀρθῶς μετιέναι τὴν σοφίαν.
"Now Euthydemus was glad to hear this, for he guessed that in the opinion of Socrates he was on the road to wisdom."

1599	ἐπεὶ δὲ διεσιώπησεν ὁ Εὐθύδημος σκοπῶν ὅ τι ἀποκρίναιτο, πάλιν ὁ Σωκράτης, ἆρα μὴ ἰατρός;
But Socrates, aware that he was pleased with his approbation, went on to say: "Tell me, Euthydemus, what kind of goodness do you want to get by collecting these books?"

1600	ἔφη ἆρα μὴ ἰατρός;
"And as Euthydemus was silent, considering what answer to give, 'Possibly you want to be a doctor?' he guessed."

1601	πολλὰ γὰρ καὶ ἰατρῶν ἐστι συγγράμματα.
"Medical treatises alone make a large collection."

1602	καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος, μὰ Δί', ἔφη, οὐκ ἔγωγε.
"Oh no, not at all," answered Euthydemus.

1603	ἀλλὰ μὴ ἀρχιτέκτων βούλει γενέσθαι;
"But perhaps you wish to be an architect?"

1604	γνωμονικοῦ γὰρ ἀνδρὸς καὶ τοῦτο δεῖ.
"One needs a well-stored mind for that too."

1605	οὔκουν ἔγωγ', ἔφη.
"No, indeed I don’t," Euthydemus replied.

1606	ἀλλὰ μὴ γεωμέτρης ἐπιθυμεῖς, ἔφη, γενέσθαι ἀγαθός, ὥσπερ ὁ Θεόδωρος;
"Well, perhaps you want to be a good mathematician, like Theodorus?"

1607	οὐδὲ γεωμέτρης, ἔφη.
"No, not that either," he said.

1608	ἀλλὰ μὴ ἀστρολόγος, ἔφη, βούλει γενέσθαι;
"Perhaps you want to be an astronomer?"

1609	ὡς δὲ καὶ τοῦτο ἠρνεῖτο, ἀλλὰ μὴ ῥαψῳδός;
And as he again said no, "Perhaps a rhapsodist, then?"

1610	ἔφη ·
he said,

1611	καὶ γὰρ τὰ Ὁμήρου σέ φασιν ἔπη πάντα κεκτῆσθαι.
"They tell me you have a complete copy of Homer."

1612	μὰ Δί' οὐκ ἔγωγ', ἔφη 
"Oh no, not at all; 

1613	τοὺς γάρ τοι ῥαψῳδοὺς οἶδα τὰ μὲν ἔπη ἀκριβοῦντας, αὐτοὺς δὲ πάνυ ἠλιθίους ὄντας.
for your rhapsodists, I know, are consummate as reciters, but they are very silly fellows themselves."

1614	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης ἔφη ἆρα μὴ ῥαψῳδός;
Then Socrates exclaimed: 

1615	οὐ δήπου, ὦ Εὐθύδημε, ταύτης τῆς ἀρετῆς ἐφίεσαι, δι' ἣν ἄνθρωποι πολιτικοὶ γίγνονται καὶ οἰκονομικοὶ καὶ ἄρχειν ἱκανοὶ καὶ ὠφέλιμοι τοῖς τε ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις καὶ ἑαυτοῖς;
"Surely, Euthydemus, you don’t covet the kind of excellence that makes good statesmen and managers, competent rulers and benefactors of themselves and mankind in general?"


1616	καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος, σφόδρα γ', ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ταύτης τῆς ἀρετῆς δέομαι.
"Yes, I do, Socrates," answered Euthydemus, "that kind of excellence I greatly desire."

1617	νὴ Δί', ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, τῆς καλλίστης ἀρετῆς καὶ μεγίστης ἐφίεσαι τέχνης;
"Why," cried Socrates, "it is the noblest kind of excellence, the greatest of arts that you covet, 

1618	ἔστι γὰρ τῶν βασιλέων αὕτη καὶ καλεῖται βασιλική.
for it belongs to kings and is dubbed 'kingly.'"



1619	ἀτάρ, ἔφη, κατανενόηκας, εἰ οἷόν τέ ἐστι μὴ ὄντα δίκαιον ἀγαθὸν ταῦτα γενέσθαι;
"However," he added, "have you reflected whether it be possible to excel in these matters without being a just man?"
"Yes, certainly; and it is, in fact, impossible to be a good citizen without justice."

1620	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη
"Yes, certainly;

1621	καὶ οὐχ οἷόν τέ γε ἄνευ δικαιοσύνης ἀγαθὸν πολίτην γενέσθαι.
and it is, in fact, impossible to be a good citizen without justice."

1622	τί οὖν;
"Then tell me,"

1623	ἔφη, σὺ δὴ τοῦτο κατείργασαι;
"have you got that?"

1624	οἶμαί γ’, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, οὐδενὸς ἂν ἧττον φανῆναι δίκαιος.
"Yes, Socrates, I think I can show myself to be as just as any man."

1625	ἆρ’ οὖν, ἔφη, τῶν δικαίων ἐστὶν ἔργα ὥσπερ τῶν τεκτόνων;
"And have just men, like carpenters, their works?"

1626	ἔστι μέντοι, ἔφη.
"Yes, they have."

1627	ἆρ’ οὖν, ἔφη, ὥσπερ οἱ τέκτονες ἔχουσι τὰ ἑαυτῶν ἔργα ἐπιδεῖξαι, οὕτως οἱ δίκαιοι τὰ αὑτῶν ἔχοιεν ἂν ἐξηγήσασθαι;
"And as carpenters can point out their works, should just men be able to rehearse theirs?"

1628	μὴ οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Εὐθύδημος, οὐ δύναμαι ἐγὼ τὰ τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἔργα ἐξηγήσασθαι;
"Do you suppose," retorted Euthydemus, "that I am unable to rehearse the works of justice?"

1629	καὶ νὴ Δί’ ἔγωγε τὰ τῆς ἀδικίας;
"Of course I can, — and the works of injustice too, 

1630	ἐπεὶ οὐκ ὀλίγα ἔστι καθ’ ἑκάστην ἡμέραν τοιαῦτα ὁρᾶν τε καὶ ἀκούειν.
since there are many opportunities of seeing and hearing of them every day."



1631	βούλει οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, γράψωμεν ἐνταυθοῖ μὲν δέλτα, ἐνταυθοῖ δὲ ἄλφα, εἶτα ὅ τι μὲν ἂν δοκῇ ἡμῖν τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἔργον εἶναι, πρὸς τὸ δέλτα τιθῶμεν, ὅ τι δ’ ἂν τῆς ἀδικίας, πρὸς τὸ ἄλφα;
"I propose, then, that we write J in this column and I in that, and then proceed to place under these letters, J and I, what we take to be the works of justice and injustice respectively."


1632	εἴ τί σοι δοκεῖ, ἔφη, προσδεῖν τούτων, ποίει ταῦτα.
"Do so, if you think it helps at all."


1633	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης γράψας ὥσπερ εἶπεν, οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, ἔστιν ἐν ἀνθρώποις ψεύδεσθαι;
Having written down the letters as he proposed, Socrates went on: "Lying occurs among men, does it not?"

1634	ἔστι μέντοι, ἔφη.
"Yes, it does."

1635	ποτέρωσε οὖν, ἔφη, θῶμεν τοῦτο;
"Under which heading, then, are we to put that?"

1636	δῆλον, ἔφη, ὅτι πρὸς τὴν ἀδικίαν.
"Under the heading of injustice, clearly."

1637	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, καὶ ἐξαπατᾶν ἔστι;
"Deceit, too, is found, is it not?"

1638	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη.
"Certainly."

1639	τοῦτο οὖν ποτέρωσε θῶμεν;
"Under which heading will that go?"

1640	καὶ τοῦτο δῆλον ὅτι, ἔφη, πρὸς τὴν ἀδικίαν.
"Under injustice again, of course."

1641	τί δὲ τὸ κακουργεῖν;
"What about doing mischief?"

1642	καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη.
"That too."

1643	τὸ δὲ ἀνδραποδίζεσθαι;
"Selling into slavery?"

1644	καὶ τοῦτο.
"That too."

1645	πρὸς δὲ τῇ δικαιοσύνῃ οὐδὲν ἡμῖν τούτων κείσεται, ὦ Εὐθύδημε;
"Then we shall assign none of these things to justice, Euthydemus?"

1646	δεινὸν γὰρ ἂν εἴη, ἔφη.
"No, it would be monstrous to do so."

1647	τί δ’;
"Alright,

1648	ἐάν τις στρατηγὸς αἱρεθεὶς ἄδικόν τε καὶ ἐχθρὰν πόλιν ἐξανδραποδίσηται, φήσομεν τοῦτον ἀδικεῖν;
suppose a man who has been elected general enslaves an unjust and hostile city, shall we say that he acts unjustly?"

1649	οὐ δῆτα, ἔφη.
"Oh no!"


1650	δίκαια δὲ ποιεῖν οὐ φήσομεν;
"We shall say that his actions are just, shall we not?"


1651	καὶ μάλα.
"Certainly."


1652	τί δ’;
What then?

1653	ἐὰν ἐξαπατᾷ πολεμῶν αὐτοῖς;
"And what if he deceives the enemy when at war?"

1654	δίκαιον, ἔφη, καὶ τοῦτο.
"That too is just."

1655	ἐὰν δὲ κλέπτῃ τε καὶ ἁρπάζῃ τὰ τούτων, οὐ δίκαια ποιήσει;
"And if he steals and plunders their goods, will not his actions be just?"

1656	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη 
"Certainly; 

1657	Ἄλλ’ ἐγώ σε τὸ πρῶτον ὑπελάμβανον πρὸς τοὺς φίλους μόνον ταῦτα ἐρωτᾶν. 
but at first I assumed that your questions had reference only to friends."

1658	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, ὅσα πρὸς τῇ ἀδικίᾳ ἐθήκαμεν, ταῦτα καὶ πρὸς τῇ δικαιοσύνῃ θετέον ἂν εἴη;
"Then everything that we assigned to injustice should be assigned to justice also?"


1659	ἔοικεν, ἔφη.
"Apparently."



1660	βούλει οὖν, ἔφη, ταῦτα οὕτω θέντες διορισώμεθα πάλιν πρὸς μὲν τοὺς πολεμίους δίκαιον εἶναι τὰ τοιαῦτα ποιεῖν, πρὸς δὲ τοὺς φίλους ἄδικον, ἀλλὰ δεῖν πρός γε τούτους ὡς ἁπλούστατον εἶναι;
"Then I propose to revise our classification, and to say: It is just to do such things to enemies, but it is unjust to do them to friends, towards whom one’s conduct should be scrupulously honest."

1661	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη ὁ Εὐθύδημος.
"By all means," Euthydemus said.

1662	τί οὖν;
"What then?"


1663	ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐάν τις στρατηγὸς ὁρῶν ἀθύμως ἔχον τὸ στράτευμα ψευσάμενος φήσῃ συμμάχους προσιέναι καὶ τῷ ψεύδει τούτῳ παύσῃ τῆς ἀθυμίας τοὺς στρατιώτας, ποτέρωθι τὴν ἀπάτην ταύτην θήσομεν;
"Now suppose that a general," Socrates said, "seeing that his army is downhearted, tells a lie and says that reinforcements are approaching, and by means of this lie checks discouragement among the men, under which heading shall we put this deception?"

1664	δοκεῖ μοι, ἔφη, πρὸς τὴν δικαιοσύνην.
"Under justice, I think."



1665	ἐὰν δέ τις υἱὸν ἑαυτοῦ δεόμενον φαρμακείας καὶ μὴ προσιέμενον φάρμακον ἐξαπατήσας ὡς σιτίον τὸ φάρμακον δῷ καὶ τῷ ψεύδει χρησάμενος οὕτως ὑγιᾶ ποιήσῃ, ταύτην αὖ τὴν ἀπάτην ποῖ θετέον;
"Suppose, again, that a man’s son refuses to take a dose of medicine when he needs it, and the father induces him to take it by pretending that it is food, and cures him by means of this lie, where shall we put this deception?"


1666	δοκεῖ μοι, ἔφη, καὶ ταύτην εἰς τὸ αὐτό.
"That too goes on the same side, I think."


1667	τί δ’;
"And again,


1668	ἐάν τις, ἐν ἀθυμίᾳ ὄντος φίλου, δείσας μὴ διαχρήσηται ἑαυτόν, κλέψῃ ἢ ἁρπάσῃ ἢ ξίφος ἢ ἄλλο τι τοιοῦτον, τοῦτο αὖ ποτέρωσε θετέον;
suppose one has a friend suffering from depression, and, for fear that he may make away with himself, one takes away his sword or something of the sort, under which heading shall we put that now?"

1669    "καὶ τοῦτο νὴ Δί’, ἔφη, πρὸς τὴν δικαιοσύνην."
"That too goes under justice, of course."

1670	λέγεις, ἔφη, σὺ οὐδὲ πρὸς τοὺς φίλους ἅπαντα δεῖν ἁπλοίζεσθαι;
"You mean, do you, that even with friends straightforward dealing is not invariably right?"

1671	μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτα, ἔφη.
"It isn’t, indeed! 

1672	ἀλλὰ μετατίθεμαι τὰ εἰρημένα, εἴπερ ἔξεστι.
I retract what I said before, if you will let me."

1673	δεῖ γέ τοι, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ἐξεῖναι πολὺ μᾶλλον ἢ μὴ ὀρθῶς τιθέναι.
"Why, I’m bound to let you; it’s far better than getting our lists wrong."



1674	τῶν δὲ δὴ τοὺς φίλους ἐξαπατώντων ἐπὶ βλάβῃ, ἵνα μηδὲ τοῦτο παραλίπωμεν ἄσκεπτον, πότερος ἀδικώτερός ἐστιν, ὁ ἑκὼν ἢ ὁ ἄκων;
"But now, consider deception practised on friends to their detriment: we mustn’t overlook that either. Which is the more unjust deception in that case, the intentional or unintentional?"


1675	ἀλλ’, ὦ Σώκρατες, οὐκέτι μὲν ἔγωγε πιστεύω οἷς ἀποκρίνομαι;
"Nay, Socrates, I have lost all confidence in my answers; 
1676	καὶ γὰρ τὰ πρόσθεν πάντα νῦν ἄλλως ἔχειν δοκεῖ μοι, ἢ ὡς ἐγὼ τότε ᾤμην;
for all the opinions that I expressed before seem now to have taken an entirely different form. 
1677	ὅμως δὲ εἰρήσθω μοι ἀδικώτερον εἶναι τὸν ἑκόντα ψευδόμενον τοῦ ἄκοντος.
Still I venture to say that the intentional deception is more unjust than the unintentional."

1678 δοκεῖ δέ σοι μάθησις καὶ ἐπιστήμη τοῦ δικαίου εἶναι ὥσπερ τῶν γραμμάτων ;
"Do you think there is a doctrine and science of the just, as there is of letters?"

1679 ἔμοιγε .
"Yes."

1680 πότερον δὲ γραμματικώτερον κρίνεις , ὃς ἂν ἑκὼν μὴ ὀρθῶς γράφῃ καὶ ἀναγιγνώσκῃ ἢ ὃς ἂν ἄκων ;
"Which, in your judgment, is the more literate, the man who intentionally blunders in writing and reading, or the man who blunders unintentionally?"

1681 ὃς ἂν ἑκών , ἔγωγε ·
"The one who blunders intentionally, I presume; 

1682 δύναιτο γὰρ ἄν , ὁπότε βούλοιτο , καὶ ὀρθῶς αὐτὰ ποιεῖν .
for he can always be accurate when he chooses."

1683 οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν ἑκὼν μὴ ὀρθῶς γράφων γραμματικὸς ἂν εἴη , ὁ δὲ ἄκων ἀγράμματος ;
"May we not say, then, that the intentional blunderer is literate and the unintentional is illiterate?"

1684 πῶς γὰρ οὔ ;
"Indeed we must."

1685 τὰ δίκαια δὲ πότερον ὁ ἑκὼν ψευδόμενος καὶ ἐξαπατῶν οἶδεν ἢ ὁ ἄκων ;
"And which knows what is just, the intentional liar and deceiver, or the unintentional?"

1686 δῆλον ὅτι ὁ ἑκών .
"The intentional, clearly."

1687 οὐκοῦν γραμματικώτερον μὲν τὸν ἐπιστάμενον γράμματα τοῦ μὴ ἐπισταμένου φῂς εἶναι ;
"You say, then, as I understand, that he who knows letters is more literate than he who is ignorant of them?"

1688 ναί .
"Yes."

1689 δικαιότερον δὲ τὸν ἐπιστάμενον τὰ δίκαια τοῦ μὴ ἐπισταμένου ;
"And he who knows what is just is more just than he who does not know?"

1690 φαίνομαι ·
"Apparently;

1691 δοκῶ δέ μοι καὶ ταῦτα οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅπως λέγειν .
but here again I don’t feel sure of my own meaning."

1692 τί δὲ δή , ὃς ἂν βουλόμενος τ- ἀληθῆ λέγειν μηδέποτε τὰ αὐτὰ περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν λέγῃ , ἀλλ’ ὁδόν τε φράζων τὴν αὐτὴν τοτὲ μὲν πρὸς ἕω , τοτὲ δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέραν φράζῃ , καὶ λογισμὸν ἀποφαινόμενος τὸν αὐτὸν τοτὲ μὲν πλείω , τοτὲ δ’ ἐλάττω ἀποφαίνηται , τί σοι δοκεῖ ὁ τοιοῦτος ;
"Now come, what do you think of the man who wants to tell the truth, but never sticks to what he says; when he shows you the way, tells you first that the road runs east, then that it runs west; and when he casts up figures, makes the total now larger, now smaller?"

1693 δῆλος νὴ Δί’ εἶναι ὅτι ἃ ᾤετο εἰδέναι οὐκ οἶδεν .
"Why, I think he shows that he doesn’t know what he thought he knew."

1694 οἶσθα δέ τινας ἀνδραποδώδεις καλουμένους ;
"Are you aware that some people are called slavish?"

1695 ἔγωγε .
"Yes."

1696 πότερον διὰ σοφίαν ἢ δι’ ἀμαθίαν ;
"To what do they owe the name, to knowledge or to ignorance?"

1697 δῆλον ὅτι δι’ ἀμαθίαν .
"To ignorance, obviously."

1698 ἆρ’ οὖν διὰ τὴν τοῦ χαλκεύειν ἀμαθίαν τοῦ ὀνόματος τούτου τυγχάνουσιν ;
"To ignorance of the smiths’ trade, shall we say?"

1699 οὐ δῆτα .
"Certainly not."

1700 ἀλλ’ ἄρα διὰ τὴν τοῦ τεκταίνεσθαι ;
"Ignorance of carpentry perhaps?"

1701 οὐδὲ διὰ ταύτην .
"No, not to that either."

1702 ἀλλὰ διὰ τὴν τοῦ σκυτεύειν ;
"Of cobbling?"

1703 οὐδὲ δι’ ἓν τούτων , ἔφη , ἀλλὰ καὶ τ- ἐναντίον · 
"No, to none of these: on the contrary, 

1704 οἱ γὰρ πλεῖστοι τῶν γε τὰ τοιαῦτα ἐπισταμένων ἀνδραποδώδεις εἰσίν .
those who are skilled in such trades are for the most part slavish."
"Then is this name given to those who are ignorant of the beautiful and good and just?"

1705 ἆρ’ οὖν τῶν τὰ καλὰ καὶ ἀγαθὰ καὶ δίκαια μὴ εἰδότων τὸ ὄνομα τοῦτ’ ἐστίν ;
those who are skilled in such trades are for the most part slavish."

1706 ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"That is my opinion," he said.

1707 οὐκοῦν δεῖ παντὶ τρόπῳ διατειναμένους φεύγειν ὅπως μὴ ἀνδράποδα ὦμεν .
"Then we must strain every nerve to escape being slaves."

1708 ἀλλὰ νὴ τοὺς θεούς , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , πάνυ ᾤμην φιλοσοφεῖν φιλοσοφίαν δι’ ἧς ἂν μάλιστα ἐνόμιζον παιδευθῆναι τὰ προσήκοντα ἀνδρὶ καλοκαγαθίας ὀρεγομένῳ ·
"By the gods, Socrates, I really thought I was engaging in a philosophy that would most effectively educate me in matters befitting a man aspiring to nobility and goodness."

1709 νῦν δὲ πῶς οἴει με ἀθύμως ἔχειν , ὁρῶντα ἐμαυτὸν διὰ μὲν τὰ προπεπονημένα οὐδὲ τὸ ἐρωτώμενον ἀποκρίνεσθαι δυνάμενον ὑπὲρ ὧν μάλιστα χρὴ εἰδέναι , ἄλλην δὲ ὁδὸν οὐδεμίαν ἔχοντα ἣν ἂν πορευόμενος βελτίων γενοίμην ;
"But now, how do you think I feel, seeing myself unable, despite all my studies, to answer questions about things one must know, and having no other path to follow that would make me a better person?"

1710 καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης , εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε ·
"And Socrates said, 'Tell me, Euthydemus;"

1711 εἰς Δελφοὺς δὲ ἤδη πώποτε ἀφίκου ;
"have you ever been to Delphi?'"

1712 καὶ δίς γε νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη .
"'Yes, indeed, twice,' he replied."

1713 κατέμαθες οὖν πρὸς τῷ ναῷ που γεγραμμένον τὸ γνῶθι σαυτόν ;
"'Then did you notice somewhere on the temple the inscription 'Know thyself'?'"

1714 ἔγωγε .
"'I did.'"

1715 πότερον οὖν οὐδέν σοι τοῦ γράμματος ἐμέλησεν ἢ προσέσχες τε καὶ ἐπεχείρησας σαυτὸν ἐπισκοπεῖν ὅστις εἴης ;
"'And did you pay no heed to the inscription, or did you attend to it and try to consider who you were?'"

1716 μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτα , ἔφη ·
"'Certainly not,' he said;"

1717 καὶ γὰρ δὴ πάνυ τοῦτό γε ᾤμην εἰδέναι ·
"'for I was very sure I knew that.'"

1718 σχολῇ γὰρ ἂν ἄλλο τι ᾔδειν , εἴ γε μηδ’ ἐμαυτὸν ἐγίγνωσκον .
"'One would hardly know anything else if one did not even know oneself.'"

1720 οὕτως ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη , ὁ μὴ εἰδὼς τὴν αὑτοῦ δύναμιν ἀγνοεῖν ἑαυτόν .
"That leads me to think that he who does not know his own powers is ignorant of himself."

1721 ἐκεῖνο δὲ οὐ φανερόν , ἔφη , ὅτι διὰ μὲν τὸ εἰδέναι ἑαυτοὺς πλεῖστα ἀγαθὰ πάσχουσιν ἄνθρωποι , διὰ δὲ τὸ ἐψεῦσθαι ἑαυτῶν πλεῖστα κακά ;
"Is it not clear too that through self-knowledge men come to much good, and through self-deception to much harm?"

1722 οἱ μὲν γὰρ εἰδότες ἑαυτοὺς τά τε ἐπιτήδεια ἑαυτοῖς ἴσασι καὶ διαγιγνώσκουσιν ἅ τε δύνανται καὶ ἃ μή ·
"For those who know themselves, know what things are expedient for themselves and discern their own powers and limitations."

1723 καὶ ἃ μὲν ἐπίστανται πράττοντες πορίζονταί τε ὧν δέονται καὶ εὖ πράττουσιν , ὧν δὲ μὴ ἐπίστανται ἀπεχόμενοι ἀναμάρτητοι γίγνονται καὶ διαφεύγουσι τὸ κακῶς πράττειν ·
"And by doing what they understand, they get what they want and prosper: by refraining from attempting what they do not understand, they make no mistakes and avoid failure."

1724 διὰ τοῦτο δὲ καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους δυνάμενοι δοκιμάζειν καὶ διὰ τῆς τῶν ἄλλων χρείας τά τε ἀγαθὰ πορίζονται καὶ τὰ κακὰ φυλάττονται .
"And consequently through their power of testing other men too, and through their intercourse with others, they get what is good and shun what is bad."

1725	οἱ δὲ μὴ εἰδότες , ἀλλὰ διεψευσμένοι τῆς ἑαυτῶν δυνάμεως , πρός τε τοὺς ἄλλους ἀνθρώπους καὶ τ- ἄλλα ἀνθρώπινα πράγματα ὁμοίως διάκεινται , καὶ οὔτε ὧν δέονται ἴσασιν οὔτε ὅ τι πράττουσιν οὔτε οἷς χρῶνται , ἀλλὰ πάντων τούτων διαμαρτάνοντες τῶν τε ἀγαθῶν ἀποτυγχάνουσι καὶ τοῖς κακοῖς περιπίπτουσι .
"Those who do not know and are deceived in their estimate of their own powers, are in the like condition with regard to other men and other human affairs. They know neither what they want, nor what they do, nor those with whom they have intercourse; but mistaken in all these respects, they miss the good and stumble into the bad."

1726 καὶ οἱ μὲν εἰδότες ὅ τι ποιοῦσιν , ἐπιτυγχάνοντες ὧν πράττουσιν , εὔδοξοί τε καὶ τίμιοι γίγνονται ·
"Furthermore, those who know what they do win fame and honour by attaining their ends."

1727 καὶ οἵ τε ὅμοιοι τούτοις ἡδέως χρῶνται , οἵ τε ἀποτυγχάνοντες τῶν πραγμάτων ἐπιθυμοῦσι τούτους ὑπὲρ αὑτῶν βουλεύεσθαι , καὶ προΐστασθαί γε αὑτῶν τούτους , καὶ τὰς ἐλπίδας τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἐν τούτοις ἔχουσι , καὶ διὰ πάντα ταῦτα πάντων μάλιστα τούτους ἀγαπῶσιν .
"Their equals are glad to have dealings with them; and those who miss their objects look to them for counsel, look to them for protection, rest on them their hopes of better things, and for all these reasons love them above all other men."

1728 οἱ δὲ μὴ εἰδότες ὅ τι ποιοῦσι , κακῶς τε αἱρούμενοι καὶ οἷς ἂν ἐπιχειρήσωσιν ἀποτυγχάνοντες , οὐ μόνον ἐν αὐτοῖς τούτοις ζημιοῦνταί τε καὶ κολάζονται , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀδοξοῦσι διὰ ταῦτα καὶ καταγέλαστοι γίγνονται καὶ καταφρονούμενοι καὶ ἀτιμαζόμενοι ζῶσιν .
"But those who know not what they do, choose amiss, fail in what they attempt and, besides incurring direct loss and punishment thereby, they earn contempt through their failures, make themselves ridiculous and live in dishonour and humiliation."

1729 ὁρᾷς δὲ καὶ τῶν πόλεων ὅτι ὅσαι ἂν ἀγνοήσασαι τὴν ἑαυτῶν δύναμιν κρείττοσι πολεμήσωσιν , αἱ μὲν ἀνάστατοι γίγνονται , αἱ δ’ ἐξ ἐλευθέρων δοῦλαι .
"And the same is true of communities. You find that whenever a state, in ignorance of its own power, goes to war with a stronger people, it is exterminated or loses its liberty."

1730 καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος , ὡς πάνυ μοι δοκοῦν , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , περὶ πολλοῦ ποιητέον εἶναι τὸ ἑαυτὸν γιγνώσκειν , οὕτως ἴσθι ·
"<persName><surname>Socrates</surname></persName>, answered Euthydemus, you may rest assured that I fully appreciate the importance of knowing oneself."

1731 ὁπόθεν δὲ χρὴ ἄρξασθαι ἐπισκοπεῖν ἑαυτόν , τοῦτο πρὸς σὲ ἀποβλέπω εἴ μοι ἐθελήσαις ἂν ἐξηγήσασθαι .
"But where should the process of self-examination begin? I look to you for a statement, please."

I apologize for the oversight. Let's align the Greek and English translations starting from sentence 1732:

1732	οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , τὰ μὲν ἀγαθὰ καὶ τὰ κακὰ ὁποῖά ἐστι πάντως που γιγνώσκεις ;
"Well," said Socrates, "I may assume, I take it, that you know what things are good and what are evil?"

1733	νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , εἰ γὰρ μηδὲ ταῦτα οἶδα , καὶ τῶν ἀνδραπόδων φαυλότερος ἂν εἴην .
"Of course, for if I don’t know so much as that, I must be worse than a slave."

1734	ἴθι δή , ἔφη , καὶ ἐμοὶ ἐξήγησαι αὐτά .
"Come then, state them for my benefit."

1735	ἀλλ’ οὐ χαλεπόν , ἔφη ·
"Well, that’s a simple matter."

1736	πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸ τὸ ὑγιαίνειν ἀγαθὸν εἶναι νομίζω , τὸ δὲ νοσεῖν κακόν ·
"First, health in itself is, I suppose, a good, sickness an evil."

1737	ἔπειτα καὶ τὰ αἴτια ἑκατέρου αὐτῶν καὶ ποτὰ καὶ βρωτὰ καὶ ἐπιτηδεύματα τὰ μὲν πρὸς τὸ ὑγιαίνειν φέροντα ἀγαθά , τὰ δὲ πρὸς τὸ νοσεῖν κακά .
"Next the various causes of these two conditions — meat, drink, habits — are good or evil according as they promote health or sickness."

1738	οὐκοῦν , ἔφη , καὶ τὸ ὑγιαίνειν καὶ τὸ νοσεῖν , ὅταν μὲν ἀγαθοῦ τινος αἴτια γίγνηται , ἀγαθὰ ἂν εἴη , ὅταν δὲ κακοῦ , κακά .
"Then health and sickness too must be good when their effect is good, and evil when it is evil."

1739	πότε δ’ ἄν , ἔφη , τὸ μὲν ὑγιαίνειν κακοῦ αἴτιον γένοιτο , τὸ δὲ νοσεῖν ἀγαθοῦ ;
"But when can health possibly be the cause of evil, or sickness of good?"

1740	ὅταν νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , στρατείας τε αἰσχρᾶς καὶ ναυτιλίας βλαβερᾶς καὶ ἄλλων πολλῶν τοιού

των οἱ μὲν διὰ ῥώμην μετασχόντες ἀπόλωνται , οἱ δὲ δι’ ἀσθένειαν ἀπολειφθέντες σωθῶσιν .
"Why, in many cases; for instance, a disastrous campaign or a fatal voyage: the able-bodied who go are lost, the weaklings who stay behind are saved."

1741	ἀληθῆ λέγεις ·
"True;"

1742	ἀλλ’ ὁρᾷς , ἔφη , ὅτι καὶ τῶν ὠφελίμων οἱ μὲν διὰ ῥώμην μετέχουσιν , οἱ δὲ δι’ ἀσθένειαν ἀπολείπονται .
"but you see, in the successful adventures too the able-bodied take part, the weaklings are left behind."

1743	ταῦτα οὖν , ἔφη , ποτὲ μὲν ὠφελοῦντα , ποτὲ δὲ βλάπτοντα , μᾶλλον ἀγαθὰ ἢ κακά ἐστιν ;
"Then since these bodily conditions sometimes lead to profit, and sometimes to loss, are they any more good than evil?"

1744	οὐδὲν μὰ Δία φαίνεται κατά γε τοῦτον τὸν λόγον .
"No, certainly not; at least so it appears from the argument."

1745 ἀλλ’ ἥ γέ τοι σοφία , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἀναμφισβητήτως ἀγαθόν ἐστι ·
"But wisdom now, Socrates, — that at any rate is indisputably a good thing; 

1746 ποῖον γὰρ ἄν τις πρᾶγμα οὐ βέλτιον πράττοι σοφὸς ὢν ἢ ἀμαθής ;
for what is there that a wise man would not do better than a fool?"

1747 τί δέ ;  
"Indeed! 

1748 τὸν Δαίδαλον , ἔφη , οὐκ ἀκήκοας ὅτι ληφθεὶς ὑπὸ Μίνω διὰ τὴν σοφίαν ἠναγκάζετο ἐκείνῳ δουλεύειν καὶ τῆς τε πατρίδος ἅμα καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἐστερήθη καὶ ἐπιχειρῶν ἀποδιδράσκειν μετὰ τοῦ υἱοῦ τόν τε παῖδα ἀπώλεσε καὶ αὐτὸς οὐκ ἐδυνήθη σωθῆναι , ἀλλ’ ἀπενεχθεὶς εἰς τοὺς βαρβάρους πάλιν ἐκεῖ ἐδούλευε ;
have you not heard how Daedalus was seized by Minos because of his wisdom, and was forced to be his slave, and was robbed of his country and his liberty, and essaying to escape with his son, lost the boy and could not save himself, but was carried off to the barbarians and again lived as a slave there?"

1749 λέγεται νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , ταῦτα .
"That is the story, of course."

1750 τὰ δὲ Παλαμήδους οὐκ ἀκήκοας πάθη ;
"And have you not heard the story of Palamedes? 

1751 τοῦτον γὰρ δὴ πάντες ὑμνοῦσιν ὡς διὰ σοφίαν φθονηθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ Ὀδυσσέως ἀπόλλυται .
Surely, for all the poets sing of him, how that he was envied for his wisdom and done to death by Odysseus."

1752 λέγεται καὶ ταῦτα , ἔφη .
"Another well-known tale!"


1753 ἄλλους δὲ πόσους οἴει διὰ σοφίαν ἀνασπάστους πρὸς βασιλέα γεγονέναι καὶ ἐκεῖ δουλεύειν ;
"And how many others, do you suppose, have been kidnapped on account of their wisdom, and haled off to the great King’s court, and live in slavery there?"

1754 κινδυνεύει , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἀναμφιλογώτατον ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τὸ εὐδαιμονεῖν .  
"Happiness seems to be unquestionably a good, Socrates."

1755 εἴ γε μή τις αὐτό , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἐξ ἀμφιλόγων ἀγαθῶν συντιθείη .  
"It would be so, Euthydemus, were it not made up of goods that are questionable."

1756 τί δ’ ἄν , ἔφη , τῶν εὐδαιμονικῶν ἀμφίλογον εἴη ;  
"But what element in happiness can be called in question?"

1757 οὐδέν , ἔφη , εἴ γε μὴ προσθήσομεν αὐτῷ κάλλος ἢ ἰσχὺν ἢ πλοῦτον ἢ δόξαν ἢ καί τι ἄλλο τῶν τοιούτων .  
"None, provided we don’t include in it beauty or strength or wealth or glory or anything of the sort."

1758 ἀλλὰ νὴ Δία προσθήσομεν , ἔφη ·  
"But of course we shall do that."

1759 πῶς γὰρ ἄν τις ἄνευ τούτων εὐδαιμονοίη ;  
"For how can anyone be happy without them?"

1760 νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , προσθήσομεν ἄρα , ἐξ ὧν πολλὰ καὶ χαλεπὰ συμβαίνει τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ·  
"Then of course we shall include the sources of much trouble to mankind."

1761 πολλοὶ μὲν γὰρ διὰ τὸ κάλλος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπὶ τοῖς ὡραίοις παρακεκινηκότων διαφθείρονται , πολλοὶ δὲ διὰ τὴν ἰσχὺν μείζοσιν ἔργοις ἐπιχειροῦντες οὐ μικροῖς κακοῖς περιπίπτουσι , πολλοὶ δὲ διὰ τὸν πλοῦτον διαθρυπτόμενοί τε καὶ ἐπιβουλευόμενοι ἀπόλλυνται , πολλοὶ δὲ διὰ δόξαν καὶ πολιτικὴν δύναμιν μεγάλα κακὰ πεπόνθασιν .  
"For many are ruined by admirers whose heads are turned at the sight of a pretty face; many are led by their strength to attempt tasks too heavy for them, and meet with serious evils: many by their wealth are corrupted, and fall victims to conspiracies; many through glory and political power have suffered great evils."

1762 ἀλλὰ μήν , ἔφη , εἴ γε μηδὲ τὸ εὐδαιμονεῖν ἐπαινῶν ὀρθῶς λέγω , ὁμολογῶ μηδ’ ὅ τι πρὸς τοὺς θεοὺς εὔχεσθαι χρὴ εἰδέναι .
"Well now, if I am at fault in praising even happiness, I confess I know not what one should ask for in one’s prayers."

1763 ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μέν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , ἴσως διὰ τὸ σφόδρα πιστεύειν εἰδέναι οὐδ’ ἔσκεψαι ·
"But perhaps you never even thought about these things, because you felt so confident that you knew them."

1764 ἐπεὶ δὲ πόλεως δημοκρατουμένης παρασκευάζῃ προεστάναι , δῆλον ὅτι δημοκρατίαν γε οἶσθα τί ἐστι .
"However, as the state you are preparing yourself to direct is governed by the people, no doubt you know what popular government is?"

1765 πάντως δήπου , ἔφη .
"I think so, certainly."

1766 δοκεῖ οὖν σοι δυνατὸν εἶναι δημοκρατίαν εἰδέναι μὴ εἰδότα δῆμον ;
"Then do you suppose it possible to know popular government without knowing the people?"

1767 μὰ Δί’ οὐκ ἔμοιγε .
"Indeed I don’t."

1768 καὶ δῆμον ἄρ’ οἶσθα τί ἐστιν ;
"And do you know, then, what the people consists of?"

1769 οἶμαι ἔγωγε .
"I think so."

1770 καὶ τί νομίζεις δῆμον εἶναι ;
"Of what do you suppose it to consist?"

1771 τοὺς πένητας τῶν πολιτῶν ἔγωγε .
"The poorer classes, I presume."

1772 καὶ τοὺς πένητας ἄρα οἶσθα ;
"You know the poor, then?"

1773 πῶς γὰρ οὔ ;
"Of course I do."

1774 ἆρ’ οὖν καὶ τοὺς πλουσίους οἶσθα ;
"And you know the rich too?"

1775 οὐδέν γε ἧττον ἢ καὶ τοὺς πένητας .
"Yes, just as well as the poor."

1776 ποίους δὲ πένητας καὶ ποίους πλουσίους καλεῖς ;
"What kind of men do you call poor and rich respectively?"

1777 τοὺς μέν , οἶμαι , μὴ ἱκανὰ ἔχοντας εἰς ἃ δεῖ τελεῖν πένητας , τοὺς δὲ πλείω τῶν ἱκανῶν πλουσίους .
"The poor, I imagine, are those who have not enough to pay for what they want; the rich those who have more than enough."

1778 καταμεμάθηκας οὖν ὅτι ἐνίοις μὲν πάνυ ὀλίγα ἔχουσιν οὐ μόνον ἀρκεῖ ταῦτα , ἀλλὰ καὶ περιποιοῦνται ἀπ’ αὐτῶν , ἐνίοις δὲ πάνυ πολλὰ οὐχ ἱκανά ἐστι ;
"Have you observed, then, that some who have very little not only find it enough, but even manage to save out of it, whereas others cannot live within their means, however large?"

1779 καὶ νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη ὁ Εὐθύδημος , ὀρθῶς γάρ με ἀναμιμνῄσκεις , οἶδα γὰρ καὶ τυράννους τινάς , οἳ δι’ ἔνδειαν ὥσπερ οἱ ἀπορώτατοι ἀναγκάζονται ἀδικεῖν .
"Yes, certainly — thanks for reminding me — I know, in fact, of some despots even who are driven to crime by poverty, just like paupers."

1780 οὐκοῦν , ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης , εἴ γε ταῦτα οὕτως ἔχει , τοὺς μὲν τυράννους εἰς τὸν δῆμον θήσομεν , τοὺς δὲ ὀλίγα κεκτημένους , ἐὰν οἰκονομικοὶ ὦσιν , εἰς τοὺς πλουσίους .
"Therefore, if that is so, we will include despots in the people, and men of small means, if they are thrifty, in the rich."

1781 καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος ἔφη ·
Euthydemus responded,

1782 ἀναγκάζει με καὶ ταῦτα ὁμολογεῖν δῆλον ὅτι ἡ ἐμὴ φαυλότης ·
"I am forced to agree once more, evidently by my stupidity."

1783 καὶ φροντίζω μὴ κράτιστον ᾖ μοι σιγᾶν ·
"I am inclined to think I had better hold my tongue,"

1784 κινδυνεύω γὰρ ἁπλῶς οὐδὲν εἰδέναι .
"or I shall know nothing at all presently."

1785 καὶ πάνυ ἀθύμως ἔχων ἀπῆλθε καὶ καταφρονήσας ἑαυτοῦ καὶ νομίσας τῷ ὄντι ἀνδράποδον εἶναι .
And so he went away very dejected, disgusted with himself and convinced that he was indeed a slave.

1786 πολλοὶ μὲν οὖν τῶν οὕτω δ

ιατεθέντων ὑπὸ Σωκράτους οὐκέτι αὐτῷ προσῇσαν , οὓς καὶ βλακοτέρους ἐνόμιζεν ·
Now many of those who were brought to this pass by Socrates, never went near him again and were regarded by him as mere blockheads.

1787 ὁ δὲ Εὐθύδημος ὑπέλαβεν οὐκ ἂν ἄλλως ἀνὴρ ἀξιόλογος γενέσθαι , εἰ μὴ ὅτι μάλιστα Σωκράτει συνείη ·
But Euthydemus guessed that he would never be of much account unless he spent as much time as possible with Socrates.

1788 καὶ οὐκ ἀπελείπετο ἔτι αὐτοῦ , εἰ μή τι ἀναγκαῖον εἴη ·
Henceforward, unless obliged to absent himself, he never left him,

1789 ἔνια δὲ καὶ ἐμιμεῖτο ὧν ἐκεῖνος ἐπετήδευεν .
and even began to adopt some of his practices.

1790 ὁ δ’ , ὡς ἔγνω αὐτὸν οὕτως ἔχοντα , ἥκιστα μὲν διετάραττεν , ἁπλούστατα δὲ καὶ σαφέστατα ἐξηγεῖτο ἅ τε ἐνόμιζεν εἰδέναι δεῖν καὶ ἐπιτηδεύειν κράτιστα εἶναι .
Socrates, for his part, seeing how it was with him, avoided worrying him, and began to expound very plainly and clearly the knowledge that he thought most needful and the practices that he held to be most excellent.

1791	τὸ μὲν οὖν λεκτικοὺς καὶ πρακτικοὺς καὶ μηχανικοὺς γίγνεσθαι τοὺς συνόντας οὐκ ἔσπευδεν, ἀλλὰ πρότερον τούτων ᾤετο χρῆναι σωφροσύνην αὐτοῖς ἐγγενέσθαι.
Skill in speaking and efficiency in affairs, therefore, and ingenuity, were not the qualities that he was eager to foster in his companions; he held that they needed first to acquire prudence.

1792	τοὺς γὰρ ἄνευ τοῦ σωφρονεῖν ταῦτα δυναμένους ἀδικωτέρους τε καὶ δυνατωτέρους κακουργεῖν ἐνόμιζεν εἶναι.
For he believed that those faculties, unless accompanied by prudence, increased in their possessors injustice and power for mischief.

1793	πρῶτον μὲν δὴ περὶ θεοὺς ἐπειρᾶτο σώφρονας ποιεῖν τοὺς συνόντας.
In the first place, then, he tried to make his companions prudent towards the gods.

1794	ἄλλοι μὲν οὖν αὐτῷ πρὸς ἄλλους οὕτως ὁμιλοῦντι παραγενόμενοι διηγοῦντο.
Accordingly he discoursed on this topic at various times, as those who were present used to relate.

1795	ἐγὼ δέ, ὅτε πρὸς Εὐθύδημον τοιάδε διελέγετο, παρεγενόμην.
The following conversation between him and Euthydemus I heard myself.

1796	εἰπέ μοι, ἔφη, ὦ Εὐθύδημε, ἤδη ποτέ σοι ἐπῆλθεν ἐνθυμηθῆναι ὡς ἐπιμελῶς οἱ θεοὶ ὧν οἱ ἄνθρωποι δέονται κατεσκευάκασι;
"Tell me, Euthydemus," he began, "has it ever occurred to you to reflect on the care the gods have taken to furnish man with what he needs?"

1797	καὶ ὅς, μὰ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, οὐκ ἔμοιγε.
"No, indeed it has not," replied Euthydemus.

1798	ἀλλ’ οἶσθά γ’, ἔφη, ὅτι πρῶτον μὲν φωτὸς δεόμεθα, ὃ ἡμῖν οἱ θεοὶ παρέχουσι;
"Well, no doubt you know that our first and foremost need is light, which is supplied to us by the gods?"

1799	νὴ Δί’, ἔφη, ὅ γ’ εἰ μὴ εἴχομεν, ὅμοιοι τοῖς τυφλοῖς ἂν ἦμεν ἕνεκά γε τῶν ἡμετέρων ὀφθαλμῶν.
"Of course," he replied, "since without light our eyes would be as useless as if we were blind."

1800	ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ἀναπαύσεώς γε δεομένοις ἡμῖν νύκτα παρέχουσι κάλλιστον ἀναπαυτήριον.
"And again, we need rest; and therefore the gods grant us the welcome respite of night."

1801	πάνυ γ’, ἔφη, καὶ τοῦτο χάριτος ἄξιον.
"Yes, that too we owe them thanks," he said.

1802	οὐκοῦν καὶ ἐπειδὴ ὁ μὲν ἥλιος φωτεινὸς ὢν τάς τε ὥρας τῆς ἡμέρας ἡμῖν καὶ τ- ἄλλα πάντα σαφηνίζει, ἡ δὲ νὺξ διὰ τὸ σκοτεινὴ εἶναι ἀσαφεστέρα ἐστίν, ἄστρα ἐν τῇ νυκτὶ ἀνέφηναν, ἃ ἡμῖν τῆς νυκτὸς τὰς ὥρας ἐμφανίζει, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο πολλὰ ὧν δεόμεθα πράττομεν;
"And since the night by reason of her darkness is dim, whereas the sun by his brightness illuminates the hours of the day and all things else, have they not made stars to shine in the night, that mark the watches of night for us, and do we not thereby satisfy many of our needs?"

1803	ἔστι ταῦτα, ἔφη.
"That is so," he replied.

1804	ἀλλὰ μὴν ἥ γε σελήνη οὐ μόνον τῆς νυκτός, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ μηνὸς τὰ μέρη φανερὰ ἡμῖν ποιεῖ.
"Moreover, the moon reveals to us not only the divisions of the night, but of the month too."

1805	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.
"Certainly," he said.

1806	τὸ δ’, ἐπεὶ τροφῆς δεόμεθα, ταύτην ἡμῖν ἐκ τῆς γῆς ἀναδιδόναι καὶ ὥρας ἁρμοττούσας πρὸς τοῦτο παρέχειν, αἳ ἡμῖν οὐ μόνον ὧν δεόμεθα πολλὰ καὶ παντοῖα παρασκευάζουσιν, ἀλλὰ καὶ οἷς εὐφραινόμεθα;
"Now, seeing that we need food, think how they make the earth to yield it, and provide to that end appropriate seasons which furnish in abundance the diverse things that minister not only to our wants but to our enjoyment."

1807	πάνυ, ἔφη, καὶ ταῦτα φιλάνθρωπα.
"Truly these things too show loving-kindness," he said.

1808	τὸ δὲ καὶ ὕδωρ ἡμῖν παρέχειν οὕτω πολλοῦ ἄξιον, ὥστε συμφύειν τε καὶ συναύξειν τῇ γῇ καὶ ταῖς ὥραις πάντα τὰ χρήσιμα ἡμῖν, συντρέφειν δὲ καὶ αὐτοὺς ἡμᾶς καὶ μιγνύμενον πᾶσι τοῖς τρέφουσιν ἡμᾶς εὐκατεργαστότερά τε καὶ ὠφελιμώτερα καὶ ἡδίω ποιεῖν αὐτά, καὶ ἐπειδὴ πλείστου δεόμεθα τούτου, ἀφθονέστατον αὐτὸ παρέχειν ἡμῖν;
"Think again of their precious gift of water, that aids the earth and the seasons to give birth and increase to all things useful to us and itself helps to nourish our bodies, and mingling with all that sustains us, makes it more digestible, more wholesome, and more palatable: and how, because we need so much of it, they supply it without stint."

1809	καὶ τοῦτο, ἔφη, προνοητικόν.
"That too shows design at work," he said.

1810	τὸ δὲ καὶ τὸ πῦρ πορίσαι ἡμῖν, ἐπίκουρον μὲν ψύχους, ἐπίκουρον δὲ σκότους, συνεργὸν δὲ πρὸς πᾶσαν τέχνην καὶ πάντα ὅσα ὠφελείας ἕνεκα ἄνθρωποι κατασκευάζονται;
"Think again of the blessing of fire, our defence against cold and against darkness, our helpmate in every art and all that man contrives for his service."

1811	ὡς γὰρ συνελόντι εἰπεῖν οὐδὲν ἀξιόλογον ἄνευ πυρὸς ἄνθρωποι τῶν πρὸς τὸν βίον χρησίμων κατασκευάζονται.
"In fact, to put it shortly, nothing of any account that is useful to the life of man is contrived without the aid of fire."

1812	ὑπερβάλλει, ἔφη, καὶ τοῦτο φιλανθρωπίᾳ.
"This too is a signal token of loving-kindness," he said.

1813	τὸ δὲ τὸν ἥλιον, ἐπειδὰν ἐν χειμῶνι τράπηται, προσιέναι τὰ μὲν ἁδρύνοντα, τὰ δὲ ξηραίνοντα, ὧν καιρὸς διελήλυθε, καὶ ταῦτα διαπραξάμενον μηκέτι ἐγγυτέρω προσιέναι, ἀλλ’ ἀποτρέπεσθαι φυλαττόμενον μή τι ἡμᾶς μᾶλλον τοῦ δέοντος θερμαίνων βλάψῃ, καὶ ὅταν αὖ πάλιν ἀπιὼν γένηται ἔνθα καὶ ἡμῖν δῆλόν ἐστιν ὅτι, εἰ προσωτέρω ἄπεισιν, ἀποπαγησόμεθα ὑπὸ τοῦ ψύχους, πάλιν αὖ τρέπεσθαι καὶ προσχωρεῖν, καὶ ἐνταῦθα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀναστρέφεσθαι ἔνθα ὢν μάλιστ’ ἂν ἡμᾶς ὠφελοίη;
"Think again how the sun, when past the winter solstice, approaches, ripening some things and withering others, whose time is over; and having accomplished this, approaches no nearer, but turns away, careful not to harm us by excess of heat; and when once again in his retreat he reaches the point where it is clear to ourselves, that if he goes further away, we shall be frozen with the cold, back he turns once more and draws near and revolves in that region of the heavens where he can best serve us."

1814	νὴ τὸν Δί’, ἔφη, καὶ ταῦτα παντάπασιν ἔοικεν ἀνθρώπων ἕνεκα γιγνομένοις.
"Yes, verily, these things do seem to be done for the sake of mankind," he said.

1815	τὸ δ’, ἐπειδὴ καὶ τοῦτο φανερὸν ὅτι οὐκ ἂν ὑπενέγκαιμεν οὔτε τὸ καῦμα οὔτε τὸ ψῦχος, εἰ ἐξαπίνης γίγνοιτο, οὕτω μὲν κατὰ μικρὸν προσιέναι τὸν ἥλιον, οὕτω δὲ κατὰ μικρὸν ἀπιέναι, ὥστε λανθάνειν ἡμᾶς εἰς ἑκάτερα τὰ ἰσχυρότατα καθισταμένους;
"And again, since it is evident that we could not endure the heat or the cold if it came suddenly, the sun’s approach and retreat are so gradual that we arrive at the one or the other extreme imperceptibly."

1816	ἐγὼ μέν, ἔφη ὁ Εὐθύδημος, ἤδη τοῦτο σκοπῶ, εἰ ἄρα τί ἐστι τοῖς θεοῖς ἔργον ἢ ἀνθρώπους θεραπεύειν;
"For myself," exclaimed Euthydemus, "I begin to doubt whether after all the gods are occupied in any other work than the service of man."

1817	ἐκεῖνο δὲ μόνον ἐμποδίζει με, ὅτι καὶ τ- ἄλλα ζῷα τούτων μετέχει.
"The one difficulty I feel is that the lower animals also enjoy these blessings."

1818	οὐ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτ’, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, φανερὸν ὅτι καὶ ταῦτα ἀνθρώπων ἕνεκα γίγνεταί τε καὶ ἀνατρέφεται;
"Yes," replied Socrates, "and is it not evident that they too receive life and food for the sake of man?"

1819	τί γὰρ ἄλλο ζῷον αἰγῶν τε καὶ οἰῶν καὶ βοῶν καὶ ἵππων καὶ ὄνων καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων τοσαῦτα ἀγαθὰ ἀπολαύει ὅσα ἄνθρωποι;
"For what creature reaps so many benefits as man from goats and sheep and horses and oxen and asses and the other animals?"

1820	ἐμοὶ μὲν γὰρ δοκεῖ, πλείω ἢ τῶν φυτῶν;
"He owes more to them, in my opinion, than to the fruits of the earth."

1821	τρέφονται γοῦν καὶ χρηματίζονται οὐδὲν ἧττον ἀπὸ τούτων ἢ ἀπ’ ἐκείνων;
"At the least they are not less valuable to him for food and commerce."

1822	πολὺ δὲ γένος ἀνθρώπων τοῖς μὲν ἐκ τῆς γῆς φυομένοις εἰς τροφὴν οὐ χρῆται, ἀπὸ δὲ βοσκημάτων γάλακτι καὶ τυρῷ καὶ κρέασι τρεφόμενοι ζῶσι;
"In fact, a large portion of mankind does not use the products of the earth for food, but lives on the milk and cheese and flesh they get from live stock."

1823	πάντες δὲ τιθασεύοντες καὶ δαμάζοντες τὰ χρήσιμα τῶν ζῴων εἴς τε πόλεμον καὶ εἰς ἄλλα πολλὰ συνεργοῖς χρῶνται.
"Moreover, all men tame and domesticate the useful kinds of animals, and make them their fellow-workers in war and many other undertakings."

1824	ὁμογνωμονῶ σοι καὶ τοῦτ’, ἔφη;
"There too I agree with you," he said.

1825	ὁρῶ γὰρ αὐτῶν καὶ τὰ πολὺ ἰσχυρότερα ἡμῶν οὕτως ὑποχείρια γιγνόμενα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ὥστε χρῆσθαι αὐτοῖς ὅ τι ἂν βούλω

νται.
"Seeing that animals far stronger than man become so entirely subject to him that he puts them to any use he chooses."

1826	τὸ δ’, ἐπειδὴ πολλὰ μὲν καλὰ καὶ ὠφέλιμα, διαφέροντα δὲ ἀλλήλων ἐστί, προσθεῖναι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις αἰσθήσεις ἁρμοττούσας πρὸς ἕκαστα, δι’ ὧν ἀπολαύομεν πάντων τῶν ἀγαθῶν;
"Think again of the multitude of things beautiful and useful and their infinite variety, and how the gods have endowed man with senses adapted for the perception of every kind, so that there is nothing good that we cannot enjoy."

1827	τὸ δὲ καὶ λογισμὸν ἡμῖν ἐμφῦσαι, ᾧ περὶ ὧν αἰσθανόμεθα λογιζόμενοί τε καὶ μνημονεύοντες καταμανθάνομεν ὅπῃ ἕκαστα συμφέρει, καὶ πολλὰ μηχανώμεθα, δι’ ὧν τῶν τε ἀγαθῶν ἀπολαύομεν καὶ τὰ κακὰ ἀλεξόμεθα;
"And again, how they have implanted in us the faculty of reasoning, whereby we are able to reason about the objects of our perceptions and to commit them to memory, and so come to know what advantage every kind can yield, and devise many means of enjoying the good and driving away the bad."

1828	τὸ δὲ καὶ ἑρμηνείαν δοῦναι, δι’ ἧς πάντων τῶν ἀγαθῶν μεταδίδομέν τε ἀλλήλοις διδάσκοντες καὶ κοινωνοῦμεν καὶ νόμους τιθέμεθα καὶ πολιτευόμεθα;
"Think of the power of expression, which enables us to impart to one another all good things by teaching and to take our share of them, to enact laws and to administer states."

1829	παντάπασιν ἐοίκασιν, ὦ Σώκρατες, οἱ θεοὶ πολλὴν τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐπιμέλειαν ποιεῖσθαι.
"Truly, Socrates, it does appear that the gods devote much care to man."

1830	τὸ δὲ καί, ᾗ ἀδυνατοῦμεν τὰ συμφέροντα προνοεῖσθαι ὑπὲρ τῶν μελλόντων, ταύτῃ αὐτοὺς ἡμῖν συνεργεῖν, διὰ μαντικῆς τοῖς πυνθανομένοις φράζοντας τὰ ἀποβησόμενα καὶ διδάσκοντας ᾗ ἂν ἄριστα γίγνοιτο;
"Yet again, in so far as we are powerless of ourselves to foresee what is expedient for the future, the gods lend us their aid, revealing the issues by divination to inquirers, and teaching them how to obtain the best results."

1831	σοὶ δ’, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἐοίκασιν ἔτι φιλικώτερον ἢ τοῖς ἄλλοις χρῆσθαι, εἴ γε μηδὲ ἐπερωτώμενοι ὑπὸ σοῦ προσημαίνουσί σοι ἅ τε χρὴ ποιεῖν καὶ ἃ μή.
"With you, Socrates, they seem to deal even more friendly than with other men, if it is true that, even unasked, they warn you by signs what to do and what not to do."

1832 ὅτι δέ γε ἀληθῆ λέγω, καὶ σὺ γνώσῃ, ἂν μὴ ἀναμένῃς ἕως ἂν τὰς μορφὰς τῶν θεῶν ἴδῃς, ἀλλ’ ἐξαρκῇ σοι τὰ ἔργα αὐτῶν ὁρῶντι σέβεσθαι καὶ τιμᾶν τοὺς θεούς.
"Yes, and you will realize the truth of what I say if, instead of waiting for the gods to appear to you in bodily presence, you are content to praise and worship them because you see their works."

1833 ἐννόει δὲ ὅτι καὶ αὐτοὶ οἱ θεοὶ οὕτως ὑποδεικνύουσιν.
"Mark that the gods themselves give the reason for doing so."

1834 οἵ τε γὰρ ἄλλοι ἡμῖν τ- ἀγαθὰ διδόντες οὐδὲν τούτων εἰς τὸ ἐμφανὲς ἰόντες διδόασι, καὶ ὁ τὸν ὅλον κόσμον συντάττων τε καὶ συνέχων, ἐν ᾧ πάντα καλὰ καὶ ἀγαθά ἐστι, καὶ ἀεὶ μὲν χρωμένοις ἀτριβῆ τε καὶ ὑγιᾶ καὶ ἀγήρατα παρέχων, θᾶττον δὲ νοήματος ὑπηρετοῦντα ἀναμαρτήτως, οὗτος τὰ μέγιστα μὲν πράττων ὁρᾶται, τάδε δὲ οἰκονομῶν ἀόρατος ἡμῖν ἐστιν.
"For when they bestow on us their good gifts, not one of them ever appears before us gift in hand; and especially he who co-ordinates and holds together the universe, wherein all things are fair and good, and presents them ever unimpaired and sound and ageless for our use, and quicker than thought to serve us unerringly, is manifest in his supreme works, and yet is unseen by us in the ordering of them."

1835 ἐννόει δ’ ὅτι καὶ ὁ πᾶσι φανερὸς δοκῶν εἶναι Ἥλιος οὐκ ἐπιτρέπει τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἑαυτὸν ἀκριβῶς ὁρᾶν, ἀλλ’, ἐάν τις αὐτὸν ἀναιδῶς ἐγχειρῇ θεάσασθαι, τὴν ὄψιν ἀφαιρεῖται.
"Mark that even the sun, who seems to reveal himself to all, permits not man to behold him closely, but if any attempts to gaze recklessly upon him, blinds their eyes."

1836 καὶ τοὺς ὑπηρέτας δὲ τῶν θεῶν εὑρήσεις ἀφανεῖς ὄντας.
"And the gods’ ministers too you will find to be invisible."

1837 κεραυνός τε γὰρ ὅτι μὲν ἄνωθεν ἀφίεται, δῆλον, καὶ ὅτι οἷς ἂν ἐντύχῃ πάντων κρατεῖ, ὁρᾶται δ’ οὔτ’ ἐπιὼν οὔτ’ ἐγκατασκήψας οὔτε ἀπιών.
"That the thunderbolt is hurled from heaven, and that he overwhelms all on whom he falls, is evident, but he is seen neither coming nor striking nor going."

1838 καὶ ἄνεμοι αὐτοὶ μὲν οὐχ ὁρῶνται, ἃ δὲ ποιοῦσι φανερὰ ἡμῖν ἐστι, καὶ προσιόντων αὐτῶν αἰσθανόμεθα.
"And the winds are themselves invisible, yet their deeds are manifest to us, and we perceive their approach."

1839 ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ἀνθρώπου γε ψυχή, ἥ, εἴπερ τι καὶ ἄλλο τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων, τοῦ θείου μετέχει, ὅτι μὲν βασιλεύει ἐν ἡμῖν, φανερόν, ὁρᾶται δὲ οὐδ’ αὐτή.
"Moreover, the soul of man, which more than all else that is human partakes of the divine, reigns manifestly within us, and yet is itself unseen."

1840 ἃ χρὴ κατανοοῦντα μὴ καταφρονεῖν τῶν ἀοράτων, ἀλλ’ ἐκ τῶν γιγνομένων τὴν δύναμιν αὐτῶν καταμανθάνοντα τιμᾶν τὸ δαιμόνιον.
"For these reasons it behoves us not to despise the things that are unseen, but, realizing their power in their manifestations, to honor the godhead."

1841 ἐγὼ μέν, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἔφη ὁ Εὐθύδημος, ὅτι μὲν οὐδὲ μικρὸν ἀμελήσω τοῦ δαιμονίου, σαφῶς οἶδα.
"Socrates," replied Euthydemus, "that I will in no wise be heedless of the godhead I know of a surety."

1842	ἐκεῖνο δὲ ἀθυμῶ , ὅτι μοι δοκεῖ τὰς τῶν θεῶν εὐεργεσίας οὐδ’ ἂν εἷς ποτε ἀνθρώπων ἀξίαις χάρισιν ἀμείβεσθαι .
But my heart fails me when I think that no man can ever render due thanks to the gods for their benefits.

1843	ἀλλὰ μὴ τοῦτο ἀθύμει, ἔφη, ὦ Εὐθύδημε;
"But do not be disheartened, Euthydemus," he said.

1844	ὁρᾷς γὰρ ὅτι ὁ ἐν Δελφοῖς θεός, ὅταν τις αὐτὸν ἐπερωτᾷ πῶς ἂν τοῖς θεοῖς χαρίζοιτο, ἀποκρίνεται;
"For you see, the god at Delphi, when asked how one might please the gods, replies."

1845	νόμῳ πόλεως;
"According to the law of the city."

1846	νόμος δὲ δήπου πανταχοῦ ἐστι κατὰ δύναμιν ἱεροῖς θεοὺς ἀρέσκεσθαι.
"And indeed, it is a universal law to please the sacred gods according to one's ability."

1847	πῶς οὖν ἄν τις κάλλιον καὶ εὐσεβέστερον τιμῴη θεοὺς ἤ, ὡς αὐτοὶ κελεύουσιν, οὕτω ποιῶν;
"How then can one more beautifully and devoutly honor the gods than by doing as they themselves command?"

1848	ἀλλὰ χρὴ τῆς μὲν δυνάμεως μηδὲν ὑφίεσθαι;
"But one must not fall short of his power."

1849	ὅταν γάρ τις τοῦτο ποιῇ, φανερὸς δήπου ἐστὶ τότε οὐ τιμῶν θεούς.
"For when one does this, it is surely evident that he is not then honoring the gods."

1850	χρὴ οὖν μηδὲν ἐλλείποντα κατὰ δύναμιν τιμᾶν τοὺς θεοὺς θαρρεῖν τε καὶ ἐλπίζειν τὰ μέγιστα ἀγαθά.
"One must therefore not fail to honor the gods to the utmost of his power and to hope and trust in the greatest goods."

1851	οὐ γὰρ παρ’ ἄλλων γ’ ἄν τις μείζω ἐλπίζων σωφρονοίη ἢ παρὰ τῶν τὰ μέγιστα ὠφελεῖν δυναμένων, οὐδ’ ἂν ἄλλως μᾶλλον ἢ εἰ τούτοις ἀρέσκοι;
"For there is no one from whom a person might more prudently hope for greater things than from those who are able to confer the greatest benefits, nor otherwise more so than by pleasing them."

1852	ἀρέσκοι δὲ πῶς ἂν μᾶλλον ἢ εἰ ὡς μάλιστα πείθοιτο αὐτοῖς;
"And how can one please them better than

 by most closely obeying them?"

1853	τοιαῦτα μὲν δὴ λέγων τε καὶ αὐτὸς ποιῶν εὐσεβεστέρους τε καὶ σωφρονεστέρους τοὺς συνόντας παρεσκεύαζεν.
"Speaking thus and acting accordingly, he prepared those around him to be more pious and prudent."

1854	ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ περὶ τοῦ δικαίου γε οὐκ ἀπεκρύπτετο ἣν εἶχε γνώμην , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἔργῳ ἀπεδείκνυτο , ἰδίᾳ τε πᾶσι νομίμως τε καὶ ὠφελίμως χρώμενος καὶ κοινῇ ἄρχουσί τε ἃ οἱ νόμοι προστάττοιεν πειθόμενος καὶ κατὰ πόλιν καὶ ἐν ταῖς στρατείαις οὕτως ὥστε διάδηλος εἶναι παρὰ τοὺς ἄλλους εὐτακτῶν , καὶ ὅτε ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις ἐπιστάτης γενόμενος οὐκ ἐπέτρεψε τῷ δήμῳ παρὰ τοὺς νόμους ψηφίσασθαι , ἀλλὰ σὺν τοῖς νόμοις ἠναντιώθη τοιαύτῃ ὁρμῇ τοῦ δήμου ἣν οὐκ ἂν οἶμαι ἄλλον οὐδένα ἄνθρωπον ὑπομεῖναι ·
Again, concerning Justice he did not hide his opinion, but proclaimed it by his actions. All his private conduct was lawful and helpful: to public authority he rendered such scrupulous obedience in all that the laws required, both in civil life and in military service, that he was a pattern of good discipline to all.

1855	καὶ ὅτε οἱ τριάκοντα προσέταττον αὐτῷ παρὰ τοὺς νόμους τι, οὐκ ἐπείθετο ·
And when the Thirty commanded him to do something against the laws, he did not comply.

1856	τοῖς τε γὰρ νέοις ἀπαγορευόντων αὐτῶν μὴ διαλέγεσθαι καὶ προσταξάντων ἐκείνῳ τε καὶ ἄλλοις τισὶ τῶν πολιτῶν ἀγαγεῖν τινα ἐπὶ θανάτῳ, μόνος οὐκ ἐπείσθη, διὰ τὸ παρὰ τοὺς νόμους αὐτῷ προστάττεσθαι ·
For when they forbade him to converse with the young men and commanded him and some others of the citizens to bring someone to death, he alone was not persuaded, because he was being commanded against the laws.

1857	καὶ ὅτε τὴν ὑπὸ Μελήτου γραφὴν ἔφευγε, τῶν ἄλλων εἰωθότων ἐν τοῖς δικαστηρίοις πρὸς χάριν τε τοῖς δικασταῖς διαλέγεσθαι καὶ κολακεύειν καὶ δεῖσθαι παρὰ τοὺς νόμους, καὶ διὰ τὰ τοιαῦτα πολλῶν πολλάκις ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν ἀφιεμένων, ἐκεῖνος οὐδὲν ἠθέλησε τῶν εἰωθότων ἐν τῷ δικαστηρίῳ παρὰ τοὺς νόμους ποιῆσαι, ἀλλὰ ῥᾳδίως ἂν ἀφεθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν, εἰ καὶ μετρίως τι τούτων ἐποίησε, προείλετο μᾶλλον τοῖς νόμοις ἐμμένων ἀποθανεῖν ἢ παρανομῶν ζῆν.
And when he was on trial for the indictment by Meletus, unlike others who were accustomed in the courts to speak for favor with the judges and to flatter and beg contrary to the laws, and through such means often escaped punishment, he refused to do any of the usual things in court against the laws. Rather, he would have preferred to die, remaining loyal to the laws, than to live by breaking them.

1858	καὶ ἔλεγε δὲ οὕτως καὶ πρὸς ἄλλους μὲν πολλάκις, οἶδα δέ ποτε αὐτὸν καὶ πρὸς Ἱππίαν τὸν Ἠλεῖον περὶ τοῦ δικαίου τοιάδε διαλεχθέντα.
And he used to speak thus not only to others many times, but I know that he once conversed with Hippias of Elis concerning justice in this way.

1859	διὰ χρόνου γὰρ ἀφικόμενος ὁ Ἱππίας Ἀθήναζε παρεγένετο τῷ Σωκράτει λέγοντι πρός τινας, ὡς θαυμαστὸν εἴη τό, εἰ μέν τις βούλοιτο σκυτέα διδάξασθαί τινα ἢ τέκτονα ἢ χαλκέα ἢ ἱππέα, μὴ ἀπορεῖν ὅποι ἂν πέμψας τούτου τύχοι, φασὶ δέ τινες καὶ ἵππον καὶ βοῦν τῷ βουλομένῳ δικαίους ποιήσασθαι πάντα μεστὰ εἶναι τῶν διδαξόντων ·
For Hippias, having come to Athens after some time, found Socrates saying to some people how wonderful it was that if someone wanted to learn to make shoes, or to be a carpenter, or a blacksmith, or a horseman, one would not be at a loss where to send him. But some claim that if one wanted to make a horse or an ox just, all places would be full of those who could teach it.

1860	ἐὰν δέ τις βούληται ἢ αὐτὸς μαθεῖν τὸ δίκαιον ἢ υἱὸν ἢ οἰκέτην διδάξασθαι, μὴ εἰδέναι ὅποι ἂν ἐλθὼν τύχοι τούτου.
But if someone wanted to learn justice himself or to have his son or servant taught it, he would not know where to go to find such a teacher.

1861	καὶ ὁ μὲν Ἱππίας ἀκούσας ταῦτα ὥσπερ ἐπισκώπτων αὐτόν, ἔτι γὰρ σύ, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ἐκεῖνα τὰ αὐτὰ λέγεις ἃ ἐγὼ πάλαι ποτέ σου ἤκουσα;
And Hippias, having heard this as if mocking him, said, "Are you still, Socrates, saying those same things which I heard from you long ago?"

1862	καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης , ὃ δέ γε τούτου δεινότερον , ἔφη , ὦ Ἱππία , οὐ μόνον ἀεὶ τὰ αὐτὰ λέγω , ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν ·
"Yes, Hippias," he replied, "always the same, and — what is more astonishing — on the same topics too! 


1863	σὺ δ’ ἴσως διὰ τὸ πολυμαθὴς εἶναι περὶ τῶν αὐτῶν οὐδέποτε τὰ αὐτὰ λέγεις .
You are so learned that I daresay you never say the same thing on the same subjects."

1864	ἀμέλει, ἔφη, πειρῶμαι καινόν τι λέγειν ἀεί.
"I certainly try to say something fresh every time," he said.

1865	πότερον, ἔφη, καὶ περὶ ὧν ἐπίστασαι;
"Do you mean, about what you know?" he said.

1866	οἷον περὶ γραμμάτων ἐάν τις ἔρηταί σε, πόσα καὶ ποῖα Σωκράτους ἐστίν, ἄλλα μὲν πρότερον, ἄλλα δὲ νῦν πειρᾷ λέγειν;
"For example, in answer to the question, 'How many letters are there in Socrates and how do you spell it?' do you try to say something different now from what you said before?"

1867	ἢ περὶ ἀριθμῶν τοῖς ἐρωτῶσιν εἰ τὰ δὶς πέντε δέκα ἐστίν, οὐ τὰ αὐτὰ νῦν ἃ καὶ πρότερον ἀποκρίνει;
"Or take figures: suppose you are asked if twice five are ten, don’t you give the same answer now as you gave before?"

1868	περὶ μὲν τούτων, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, ὥσπερ σύ, καὶ ἐγὼ ἀεὶ τὰ αὐτὰ λέγω;
"About letters and figures, Socrates, I always say the same thing, just like you," he said.

1869	περὶ μέντοι τοῦ δικαίου πάνυ οἶμαι νῦν ἔχειν εἰπεῖν, πρὸς ἃ οὔτε σὺ οὔτ’ ἂν ἄλλος οὐδεὶς δύναιτ’ ἀντειπεῖν.
"As for Justice, I feel confident that I can now say that which neither you nor anyone else can contradict."

1870	νὴ τὴν Ἥραν, ἔφη, μέγα λέγεις ἀγαθὸν ηὑρηκέναι, εἰ παύσονται μὲν οἱ δικασταὶ δίχα ψηφιζόμενοι, παύσονται δ’ οἱ πολῖται περὶ τῶν δικαίων ἀντιλέγοντές τε καὶ ἀντιδικοῦντες καὶ στασιάζοντες, παύσονται δ’ αἱ πόλεις διαφερόμεναι περὶ τῶν δικαίων καὶ πολεμοῦσαι.
"By Hera," he said, "you claim to have made a great discovery, if jurymen are to cease from voting different ways, citizens from disputing and litigation, and cities from quarrelling about their rights and making war."

1871	καὶ ἐγὼ μὲν οὐκ οἶδ’ ὅπως ἂν ἀπολειφθείην σου πρὸ τοῦ ἀκοῦσαι τηλικοῦτον ἀγαθὸν ηὑρηκότος.
"And I do not know how I could leave you before hearing of such a great good you have found."

1872	ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’, ἔφη, οὐκ ἀκούσῃ, πρίν γ’ ἂν αὐτὸς ἀποφήνῃ, ὅ τι νομίζεις τὸ δίκαιον εἶναι.
"But by Zeus," he said, "you shall not hear it unless you yourself declare what you think justice is."

1873	ἀρκεῖ γὰρ ὅτι τῶν ἄλλων καταγελᾷς ἐρωτῶν μὲν καὶ ἐλέγχων πάντας, αὐτὸς δ’ οὐδενὶ θέλων ὑπέχειν λόγον οὐδὲ γνώμην ἀποφαίνεσθαι περὶ οὐδενός.
"For it is enough that you laugh at others, questioning and examining everyone, but yourself unwilling to render an account or to state an opinion about anything."

1874	τί δέ, ὦ Ἱππία;
"What then, Hippias?"

1875	ἔφη, οὐκ ᾔσθησαι ὅτι ἐγὼ ἃ δοκεῖ μοι δίκαια εἶναι οὐδὲν παύομαι ἀποδεικνύμενος;
"Have you not noticed," he said, "that I never cease to declare my notions of what is just?"

1876	καὶ ποῖος δή σοι, ἔφη, οὗτος ὁ λόγος ἐστίν;
"And what is this declaration of yours?" he asked.

1877	εἰ δὲ μὴ λόγῳ, ἔφη, ἀλλ’ ἔργῳ ἀποδείκνυμαι;
"If not by word," he said, "then I demonstrate it by deed."

1878	ἢ οὐ δοκεῖ σοι ἀξιοτεκμαρτότερον τοῦ λόγου τὸ ἔργον εἶναι;
"Or do you not think that action is a more reliable proof than words?"

1879	πολύ γε νὴ Δί’, ἔφη;
"Much more indeed, by Zeus," he said.

1880	δίκαια μὲν γὰρ λέγοντες πολλοὶ ἄδικα ποιοῦσι, δίκαια δὲ πράττων οὐδ’ ἂν εἷς ἄδικος εἴη.
"For many who speak justly do unjust things, but no one who acts justly can be unjust."

1881	ᾔσθησαι οὖν πώποτέ μου ἢ ψευδομαρτυροῦντος ἢ συκοφαντοῦντος ἢ φίλους ἢ πόλιν εἰς στάσιν ἐμβάλλοντος ἢ ἄλλο τι ἄδικον πράττοντος;
"Have you ever then observed me either perjuring or slandering, or causing strife among friends or in the city, or doing any other unjust deed?"

1882	οὐκ ἔγωγ’, ἔφη.
"No, indeed," he said.

1883	τὸ δὲ τῶν ἀδίκων ἀπέχεσθαι οὐ δίκαιον ἡγῇ;
"Do you not consider it just to abstain from injustices?"

1884	δῆλος εἶ, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, καὶ νῦν διαφεύγειν ἐγχειρῶν τὸ ἀποδείκνυσθαι γνώμην, ὅ τι νομίζεις τὸ δίκαιον;
"You are clearly avoiding the task, Socrates," he said, "of declaring your opinion on what you consider just."

1885	οὐ γὰρ ἃ πράττουσιν οἱ δίκαιοι, ἀλλ’ ἃ μὴ πράττουσι, ταῦτα λέγεις.
"For you speak not of what the just do, but of what they do not do."

1886	ἀλλ’ ᾤμην ἔγωγ’, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, τὸ μὴ θέλειν ἀδικεῖν ἱκανὸν δικαιοσύνης ἐπίδειγμα εἶναι.
"But I thought," Socrates said, "that not wanting to commit injustice was a sufficient demonstration of justice."

1887	εἰ δέ σοι μὴ δοκεῖ, σκέψαι ἐὰν τόδε σοι μᾶλλον ἀρέσκῃ;
"If you do not think so, consider whether you prefer this."

1888	φημὶ γὰρ ἐγὼ τὸ νόμιμον δίκαιον εἶναι.
"For I assert that what is lawful is just."

1889	ἆρα τὸ αὐτὸ λέγεις, ὦ Σώκρατες, νόμιμόν τε καὶ δίκαιον εἶναι;
"Do you mean, Socrates, that lawful and just are the same thing?"

1890	ἔγωγε, ἔφη.
"I do," he said.

1891	οὐ γὰρ αἰσθάνομαί σου ὁποῖον νόμιμον ἢ ποῖον δίκαιον λέγεις.
"For I don’t see what you mean by lawful or what you mean by just."

1892	νόμους δὲ πόλεως, ἔφη, γιγνώσκεις;
"Do you recognize the concept of state laws?" he asked.

1893	ἔγωγε, ἔφη.
"I do," he said.

1894	καὶ τίνας τούτους νομίζεις;
"And what do you consider these to be?"

1895	ἃ οἱ πολῖται, ἔφη, συνθέμενοι ἅ τε δεῖ ποιεῖν καὶ ὧν ἀπέχεσθαι ἐγράψαντο.
"The agreements made by citizens regarding what must be done and what must be avoided," he said.

1896	οὐκοῦν, ἔφη, νόμιμος μὲν ἂν εἴη ὁ κατὰ ταῦτα πολιτευόμενος, ἄνομος δὲ ὁ ταῦτα παραβαίνων;
"Then, would not the one who acts according to these be lawful, and the one who transgresses them be unlawful?" he asked.

1897	πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ἔφη.
"Very much so," he agreed.

1898	οὐκοῦν καὶ δίκαια μὲν ἂν πράττοι ὁ τούτοις πειθόμενος, ἄδικα δ’ ὁ τούτοις ἀπειθῶν;
"Then, wouldn't the one who obeys these be doing just actions, and the one who disobeys be doing unjust actions?"

1899	πάνυ μὲν οὖν.
"Indeed so."

1900	οὐκοῦν ὁ μὲν τὰ δίκαια πράττων δίκαιος, ὁ δὲ τὰ ἄδικα ἄδικος;
"So, the one who does just actions is just, and the one who does unjust actions is unjust?"

1901	πῶς γὰρ οὔ;
"How could it not be?"

1902	ὁ μὲν ἄρα νόμιμος δίκαιός ἐστιν, ὁ δὲ ἄνομος ἄδικος.
"Thus, the lawful person is just, and the unlawful person is unjust."

1903	καὶ ὁ Ἱππίας, νόμους δ’, ἔφη, ὦ Σώκρατες, πῶς ἄν τις ἡγήσαιτο σπουδαῖον πρᾶγμα εἶναι ἢ τὸ πείθεσθαι αὐτοῖς, οὕς γε πολλάκις αὐτοὶ οἱ θέμενοι ἀποδοκιμάσαντες μετατίθενται;
Hippias then said, "Socrates, how can anyone

 consider it a serious matter to obey laws that the very legislators often reject and change?"

1904	καὶ γὰρ πόλεμον, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, πολλάκις ἀράμεναι πόλεις πάλιν εἰρήνην ποιοῦνται.
"For cities often wage war and then make peace again," Socrates said.

1905	καὶ μάλα, ἔφη.
"Certainly," he said.

1906	διάφορον οὖν τι οἴει ποιεῖν, ἔφη, τοὺς τοῖς νόμοις πειθομένους φαυλίζων, ὅτι καταλυθεῖεν ἂν οἱ νόμοι, ἢ εἰ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς πολέμοις εὐτακτοῦντας ψέγοις, ὅτι γένοιτ’ ἂν εἰρήνη;
"Is there any difference," he asked, "in belittling those who obey the laws because the laws might be annulled, or in blaming those who are disciplined in war because peace might be made?"

1907	ἢ καὶ τοὺς ἐν τοῖς πολέμοις ταῖς πατρίσι προθύμως βοηθοῦντας μέμφῃ;
"Or would you also censure those who eagerly assist their homelands in wars?"

1908	μὰ Δί’ οὐκ ἔγωγ’, ἔφη.
"By Zeus, no," he said.


1909 Λυκοῦργον δὲ τὸν Λακεδαιμόνιον, ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, καταμεμάθηκας, ὅτι οὐδὲν ἂν διάφορον τῶν ἄλλων πόλεων τὴν Σπάρτην ἐποίησεν, εἰ μὴ τὸ πείθεσθαι τοῖς νόμοις μάλιστα ἐνειργάσατο αὐτῇ;
"Have you learned about Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian," Socrates said, "who made Sparta different from other cities not by anything other than by establishing the utmost obedience to the laws in it?"

1910 τῶν δὲ ἀρχόντων ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν οὐκ οἶσθα ὅτι, οἵτινες ἂν τοῖς πολίταις αἰτιώτατοι ὦσι τοῦ τοῖς νόμοις πείθεσθαι, οὗτοι ἄριστοί εἰσι, καὶ πόλις, ἐν ᾗ μάλιστα οἱ πολῖται τοῖς νόμοις πείθονται, ἐν εἰρήνῃ τε ἄριστα διάγει καὶ ἐν πολέμῳ ἀνυπόστατός ἐστιν;
"And do you not know that among the rulers in cities, those who most cause their citizens to obey the laws are the best, and a city where the citizens most obey the laws is most excellent in peace and most formidable in war?"

1911 ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ὁμόνοιά γε μέγιστόν τε ἀγαθὸν δοκεῖ ταῖς πόλεσιν εἶναι καὶ πλειστάκις ἐν αὐταῖς αἵ τε γερουσίαι καὶ οἱ ἄριστοι ἄνδρες παρακελεύονται τοῖς πολίταις ὁμονοεῖν, καὶ πανταχοῦ ἐν τῇ Ἑλλάδι νόμος κεῖται τοὺς πολίτας ὀμνύναι ὁμονοήσειν, καὶ πανταχοῦ ὀμνύουσι τὸν ὅρκον τοῦτον;
"Moreover, harmony is deemed the greatest good for cities, and in them, the councils and the best men often exhort the citizens to unity, and everywhere in Greece, there is a law for citizens to swear to be harmonious, and everywhere they swear this oath."

1912 οἶμαι δ’ ἐγὼ ταῦτα γίγνεσθαι οὐχ ὅπως τοὺς αὐτοὺς χοροὺς κρίνωσιν οἱ πολῖται, οὐδ’ ὅπως τοὺς αὐτοὺς αὐλητὰς ἐπαινῶσιν, οὐδ’ ὅπως τοὺς αὐτοὺς ποιητὰς αἱρῶνται, οὐδ’ ἵνα τοῖς αὐτοῖς ἥδωνται, ἀλλ’ ἵνα τοῖς νόμοις πείθωνται.
"I think these things happen not so that the citizens may judge the same choirs, or praise the same flute-players, or choose the same poets, or take pleasure in the same things, but so that they may obey the laws."

1913 τούτοις γὰρ τῶν πολιτῶν ἐμμενόντων, αἱ πόλεις ἰσχυρόταταί τε καὶ εὐδαιμονέσταται γίγνονται;
"For with the citizens abiding by these [laws], the cities become the strongest and most prosperous."

1914 ἄνευ δὲ ὁμονοίας οὔτ’ ἂν πόλις εὖ πολιτευθείη οὔτ’ οἶκος καλῶς οἰκηθείη.
"Without harmony, neither can a city be well governed, nor can a house be well managed."

1915 ἰδίᾳ δὲ πῶς μὲν ἄν τις ἧττον ὑπὸ πόλεως ζημιοῖτο, πῶς δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον τιμῷτο, ἢ εἰ τοῖς νόμοις πείθοιτο;
"And individually, how could one incur fewer penalties from the state, or gain more honor, than by obeying the laws?"

1916 πῶς δ’ ἂν ἧττον ἐν τοῖς δικαστηρίοις ἡττῷτο ἢ πῶς ἂν μᾶλλον νικῴη;
"How could one be less likely to be defeated in courts, or more likely to prevail?"

1917 τίνι δ’ ἄν τις μᾶλλον πιστεύσειε παρακαταθέσθαι ἢ χρήματα ἢ υἱοὺς ἢ θυγατέρας;
"To whom would one more likely entrust deposits, be it money, sons, or daughters?"

1918 τίνα δ’ ἂν ἡ πόλις ὅλη ἀξιοπιστότερον ἡγήσαιτο τοῦ νομίμου;
"Whom would the whole city consider more trustworthy than the lawful?"

1919 παρὰ τίνος δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον τῶν δικαίων τύχοιεν ἢ γονεῖς ἢ οἰκεῖοι ἢ οἰκέται ἢ φίλοι ἢ πολῖται ἢ ξένοι;
"From whom else would one more likely obtain their rights, be they parents, relatives, servants, friends, fellow-citizens, or foreigners?"

1920	τίνι δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον πολέμιοι πιστεύσειαν ἢ ἀνοχὰς ἢ σπονδὰς ἢ συνθήκας περὶ εἰρήνης;
"Whom would enemies trust more for truces, treaties, or peace agreements?"

1921	τίνι δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον ἢ τῷ νομίμῳ σύμμαχοι ἐθέλοιεν γίγνεσθαι;
"Whom would allies prefer to join with more than the lawful?"

1922	τῷ δ’ ἂν μᾶλλον οἱ σύμμαχοι πιστεύσειαν ἢ ἡγεμονίαν ἢ φρουραρχίαν ἢ πόλεις;
"To whom would allies more likely entrust command, guardianship, or cities?"

1923	τίνα δ’ ἄν τις εὐεργετήσας ὑπολάβοι χάριν κομιεῖσθαι μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν νόμιμον;
"Whom would one, having done a favor, expect to receive gratitude from more than the lawful?"

1924	ἢ τίνα μᾶλλον ἄν τις εὐεργετήσειεν ἢ παρ’ οὗ χάριν ἀπολήψεσθαι νομίζει;
"Or whom would one prefer to do a favor for than one from whom he believes he will receive gratitude in return?"

1925	τῷ δ’ ἄν τις βούλοιτο μᾶλλον φίλος εἶναι ἢ τῷ τοιούτῳ, ἢ τῷ ἧττον ἐχθρός;
"Whom would one rather be friends with than such a person, or least of all be enemies with?"

1926	τῷ δ’ ἄν τις ἧττον πολεμήσειεν ἢ ᾧ μάλιστα μὲν φίλος εἶναι βούλοιτο, ἥκιστα δ’ ἐχθρός, καὶ ᾧ πλεῖστοι μὲν φίλοι καὶ σύμμαχοι βούλοιντο εἶναι, ἐλάχιστοι δ’ ἐχθροὶ καὶ πολέμιοι;
"Whom would one least likely wage war against than one whom most desire as a friend and least as an enemy, and one who attracts the most friends and allies, and the fewest enemies and adversaries?"

1927	ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν , ὦ Ἱππία , τὸ αὐτὸ ἀποδείκνυμαι νόμιμόν τε καὶ δίκαιον εἶναι ·
So, Hippias, I declare lawful and just to be the same thing.

1928	σὺ δ’ εἰ τ- ἐναντία γιγνώσκεις , δίδασκε .
If you are of the contrary opinion, tell me.

1929	καὶ ὁ Ἱππίας , ἀλλὰ μὰ τὸν Δί’ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , οὔ μοι δοκῶ τ- ἐναντία γιγνώσκειν οἷς εἴρηκας περὶ τοῦ δικαίου .
Upon my word, Socrates, answered Hippias, I don’t think my opinion is contrary to what you have said about Justice.

1930	ἀγράφους δέ τινας οἶσθα , ἔφη , ὦ Ἱππία , νόμους ;
Do you know what is meant by "unwritten laws," Hippias?

1931	τούς γ’ ἐν πάσῃ , ἔφη , χώρᾳ κατὰ τ- αὐτὰ νομιζομένους .
Yes, those that are uniformly observed in every country.

1932	ἔχοις ἂν οὖν εἰπεῖν , ἔφη , ὅτι οἱ ἄνθρωποι αὐτοὺς ἔθεντο ;
Could you say that men made them?

1933	καὶ πῶς ἄν , ἔφη , οἵ γε οὔτε συνελθεῖν ἅπαντες ἂν δυνηθεῖεν οὔτε ὁμόφωνοί εἰσι ;
Nay, how could that be, seeing that they cannot all meet together and do not speak the same language?

1934	τίνας οὖν , ἔφη , νομίζεις τεθεικέναι τοὺς νόμους τούτους ;
Then by whom have these laws been made, do you suppose?

1935	ἐγὼ μέν , ἔφη , θεοὺς οἶμαι τοὺς νόμους τούτους τοῖς ἀνθρώποις θεῖναι ·
I think that the gods made these laws for men.

1936	καὶ γὰρ παρὰ πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις πρῶτον νομίζεται θεοὺς σέβειν .
For among all men the first law is to fear the gods.

1937	οὐκοῦν καὶ γονέας τιμᾶν πανταχοῦ νομίζεται ;
Is not the duty of honouring parents another universal law?

1938	καὶ τοῦτο , ἔφη .
Yes, that is another.

1939	οὐκοῦν καὶ μήτε γον

έας παισὶ μίγνυσθαι μήτε παῖδας γονεῦσιν ;
And that parents shall not have sexual intercourse with their children nor children with their parents?

1940	οὐκέτι μοι δοκεῖ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , οὗτος θεοῦ νόμος εἶναι .
No, I don’t think that is a law of God.

1941	τί δή ;
Why so?

1942	ἔφη .
He said,

1943	ὅτι , ἔφη , αἰσθάνομαί τινας παραβαίνοντας αὐτόν .
Because I notice that some transgress it.

1944	καὶ γὰρ ἄλλα πολλά , ἔφη , παρανομοῦσιν ·
Yes, and they do many other things contrary to the laws.

1945	ἀλλὰ δίκην γέ τοι διδόασιν οἱ παραβαίνοντες τοὺς ὑπὸ τῶν θεῶν κειμένους νόμους , ἣν οὐδενὶ τρόπῳ δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ διαφυγεῖν , ὥσπερ τοὺς ὑπ’ ἀνθρώπων κειμένους νόμους ἔνιοι παραβαίνοντες διαφεύγουσι τὸ δίκην διδόναι , οἱ μὲν λανθάνοντες , οἱ δὲ βιαζόμενοι .
But surely the transgressors of the laws ordained by the gods pay a penalty that a man can in no wise escape, as some, when they transgress the laws ordained by man, escape punishment, either by concealment or by violence.

1946	καὶ ποίαν , ἔφη , δίκην , ὦ Σώκρατες , οὐ δύνανται διαφεύγειν γονεῖς τε παισὶ καὶ παῖδες γονεῦσι μιγνύμενοι ;
And pray what sort of penalty is it, Socrates, that may not be avoided by parents and children who have intercourse with one another?

1947	τὴν μεγίστην νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη ·
The greatest, of course.

1948	τί γὰρ ἂν μεῖζον πάθοιεν ἄνθρωποι τεκνοποιούμενοι τοῦ κακῶς τεκνοποιεῖσθαι ;
For what greater penalty can men incur when they beget children than begetting them badly?

1949	πῶς οὖν , ἔφη , κακῶς οὗτοι τεκνοποιοῦνται , οὕς γε οὐδὲν κωλύει ἀγαθοὺς αὐτοὺς ὄντας ἐξ ἀγαθῶν παιδοποιεῖσθαι ;
How do they beget children badly then, if, as may well happen, the fathers are good men and the mothers good women?

1950	ὅτι νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐ μόνον ἀγαθοὺς δεῖ τοὺς ἐξ ἀλλήλων παιδοποιουμένους εἶναι , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀκμάζοντας τοῖς σώμασιν .
Surely because it is not enough that the two parents should be good. They must also be in full bodily vigour.

1951	ἢ δοκεῖ σοι ὅμοια τὰ σπέρματα εἶναι τ

ὰ τῶν ἀκμαζόντων τοῖς τῶν μήπω ἀκμαζόντων ἢ τῶν παρηκμακότων ;
Unless you suppose that those who are in full vigour are no more efficient as parents than those who have not yet reached that condition or have passed it.

1952	ἀλλὰ μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη , οὐκ εἰκὸς ὅμοια εἶναι .
Of course that is unlikely.

1953	πότερα οὖν , ἔφη , βελτίω ;
Which are the better then?

1954	δῆλον ὅτι , ἔφη , τὰ τῶν ἀκμαζόντων .
Those who are in full vigour, clearly.

1955	τὰ τῶν μὴ ἀκμαζόντων ἄρα οὐ σπουδαῖα ;
Consequently, those who are not in full vigour are not competent to become parents?

1956	οὐκ εἰκὸς μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη .
It is improbable, of course.

1957	οὐκοῦν οὕτω γε οὐ δεῖ παιδοποιεῖσθαι ;
In that case then, they ought not to have children?

1958	οὐ γὰρ οὖν , ἔφη .
Certainly not.

1959	οὐκοῦν οἵ γε οὕτω παιδοποιούμενοι ὡς οὐ δεῖ παιδοποιοῦνται ;
Therefore those who produce children in such circumstances produce them wrongly?

1960	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
I think so.

1961	τίνες οὖν ἄλλοι , ἔφη , κακῶς ἂν παιδοποιοῖντο , εἴ γε μὴ οὗτοι ;
Who then will be bad fathers and mothers, if not they?

1962	ὁμογνωμονῶ σοι , ἔφη , καὶ τοῦτο .
I agree with you there too.

1963 τί δέ ;
Again,

1964 τοὺς εὖ ποιοῦντας ἀντευεργετεῖν οὐ πανταχοῦ νόμιμόν ἐστι ;
 is not the duty of requiting benefits universally recognized by law?

1965 νόμιμον , ἔφη ·
Yes, but this law



1966 παραβαίνεται δὲ καὶ τοῦτο .
 too is broken.


1967 οὐκοῦν καὶ οἱ τοῦτο παραβαίνοντες δίκην διδόασι , φίλων μὲν ἀγαθῶν ἔρημοι γιγνόμενοι , τοὺς δὲ μισοῦντας ἑαυτοὺς ἀναγκαζόμενοι διώκειν ;
Then does not a man pay forfeit for the breach of that law too, in the gradual loss of good friends and the necessity of hunting those who hate him?



1968 ἢ οὐχ οἱ μὲν εὖ ποιοῦντες τοὺς χρωμένους ἑαυτοῖς ἀγαθοὶ φίλοι εἰσίν , οἱ δὲ μὴ ἀντευεργετοῦντες τοὺς τοιούτους διὰ μὲν τὴν ἀχαριστίαν μισοῦνται ὑπ’ αὐτῶν , διὰ δὲ τὸ μάλιστα λυσιτελεῖν τοῖς τοιούτοις χρῆσθαι τούτους μάλιστα διώκουσι ;
Or is it not true that, whereas those who benefit an acquaintance are good friends to him, he is hated by them for his ingratitude, if he makes no return, and then, because it is most profitable to enjoy the acquaintance of such men, he hunts them most assiduously?


1969 νὴ τὸν Δί’ , ὦ Σώκρατες , ἔφη , θεοῖς ταῦτα πάντα ἔοικε ·
Assuredly, Socrates, all this does suggest the work of the gods.



1970 τὸ γὰρ τοὺς νόμους αὐτοὺς τοῖς παραβαίνουσι τὰς τιμωρίας ἔχειν βελτίονος ἢ κατ’ ἄνθρωπον νομοθέτου δοκεῖ μοι εἶναι .
For laws that involve in themselves punishment meet for those who break them, must, I think, be framed by a better legislator than man.



1971 πότερον οὖν , ὦ Ἱππία , τοὺς θεοὺς ἡγῇ τὰ δίκαια νομοθετεῖν ἢ ἄλλα τῶν δικαίων ;
Then, Hippias, do you think that the gods ordain what is just or what is otherwise?



1972 οὐκ ἄλλα μὰ Δί’ , ἔφη ·
Not what is otherwise — of course not; 

1973 σχολῇ γὰρ ἂν ἄλλος γέ τις τὰ δίκαια νομοθετήσειεν , εἰ μὴ θεός .
for if a god ordains not that which is just, surely no other legislator can do so.


1974 καὶ τοῖς θεοῖς ἄρα , ὦ Ἱππία , τὸ αὐτὸ δίκαιόν τε καὶ νόμιμον εἶναι ἀρέσκει .
Consequently, Hippias, the gods too accept the identification of just and lawful.


1975 τοιαῦτα λέγων τε καὶ πράττων δικαιοτέρους ἐποίει τοὺς πλησιάζοντας .
By such words and actions he encouraged Justice in those who resorted to his company.





1976 ὡς δὲ καὶ πρακτικωτέρους ἐποίει τοὺς συνόντας ἑαυτῷ , νῦν αὖ τοῦτο λέξω .
He did also try to make his companions efficient in affairs, as I will now show.



1977 νομίζων γὰρ ἐγκράτειαν ὑπάρχειν ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τῷ μέλλοντι καλόν τι πράξειν , πρῶτον μὲν αὐτὸς φανερὸς ἦν τοῖς συνοῦσιν ἠσκηκὼς αὑτὸν μάλιστα πάντων ἀνθρώπων , ἔπειτα διαλεγόμενος προετρέπετο πάντων μάλιστα τοὺς συνόντας πρὸς ἐγκράτειαν .
For holding that it is good for anyone who means to do honourable work to have self-control, he made it clear to his companions, in the first place, that he had been assiduous in self-discipline; moreover, in his conversation he exhorted his companions to cultivate self-control above all things.

1978	ἀεὶ μὲν οὖν περὶ τῶν πρὸς ἀρετὴν χρησίμων αὐτός τε διετέλει μεμνημένος καὶ τοὺς συνόντας πάντας ὑπομιμνῄσκων ·
Thus he bore in mind continually the aids to virtue, and put all his companions in mind of them.

1979	οἶδα δέ ποτε αὐτὸν καὶ πρὸς Εὐθύδημον περὶ ἐγκρατείας τοιάδε διαλεχθέντα ·
I recall in particular the substance of a conversation that he once had with Euthydemus on self-control.

1980	εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἆρα καλὸν καὶ μεγαλεῖον νομίζεις εἶναι καὶ ἀνδρὶ καὶ πόλει κτῆμα ἐλευθερίαν ;
"Tell me, Euthydemus," he said, "do you think that freedom is a noble and splendid possession both for individuals and for communities?"

1981	ὡς οἷόν τέ γε μάλιστα , ἔφη .
"Yes, I think it is, in the highest degree," [Euthydemus] replied.

1982	ὅστις οὖν ἄρχεται ὑπὸ τῶν διὰ τοῦ σώματος ἡδονῶν καὶ διὰ ταύτας μὴ δύναται πράττειν τὰ βέλτιστα , νομίζεις τοῦτον ἐλεύθερον εἶναι ;
"Then do you think that the man is free who is ruled by bodily pleasures and is unable to do what is best because of them?"

1983	ἥκιστα , ἔφη .
"By no means," [Euthydemus] replied.

1984	ἴσως γὰρ ἐλευθέριον φαίνεταί σοι τὸ πράττειν τὰ βέλτιστα , εἶτα τὸ ἔχειν τοὺς κωλύσοντας τὰ τοιαῦτα ποιεῖν ἀνελεύθερον νομίζεις ;
"Possibly, in fact, to do what is best appears to you to be freedom, and so you think that to have masters who will prevent such activity is bondage?"

1985	παντάπασί γ’ , ἔφη .
"I am sure of it," [Euthydemus] agreed.

1986	παντάπασιν ἄρα σοι δοκοῦσιν οἱ ἀκρατεῖς ἀνελεύθεροι εἶναι ;
"You feel sure then that the incontinent are bond slaves?"

1987	νὴ τὸν Δί’ εἰκότως .
"Of course, naturally," [Euthydemus] said.

1988	πότερα δέ σοι δοκοῦσιν οἱ ἀκρατεῖς κωλύεσθαι μόνον τὰ κάλλιστα πράττειν ἢ καὶ ἀναγκάζεσθαι τὰ αἴσχιστα ποιεῖν ;
"And do you think that the incontinent are merely prevented from doing what is most honourable, or are also forced to do what is most dishonourable?"

1989	οὐδὲν ἧττον ἔμοιγ’ , ἔφη , δοκοῦσι ταῦτα ἀναγκάζεσθαι ἢ ἐκεῖνα κωλύεσθαι .
"I think that they are forced to do that just as much as they are prevented from doing the other," [Euthydemus] replied.

1990	ποίους δέ τινας δεσπότας ἡγῇ τοὺς τὰ μὲν ἄριστα κωλύοντας , τὰ δὲ κάκιστα ἀναγκάζοντας ;
"What sort of masters do you consider those who prevent the best actions and compel the worst?"

1991	ὡς δυνατὸν νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , κακίστους .
"The worst possible, by Zeus," [Euthydemus] replied.

1992	δουλείαν δὲ ποίαν κακίστην νομίζεις εἶναι ;
"And what kind of slavery do you think is the worst?"

1993	ἐγὼ μέν , ἔφη , τὴν παρὰ τοῖς κακίστοις δεσπόταις .
"I think," he said, "that which is under the worst masters."

1994	τὴν κακίστην ἄρα δουλείαν οἱ ἀκρατεῖς δουλεύουσιν ;
"So, the incontinent are in the worst kind of slavery?"

1995	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"It seems so to me," [Euthydemus] replied.

1996	σοφίαν δὲ τὸ μέγιστον ἀγαθὸν οὐ δοκεῖ σοι ἀπείργουσα τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἡ ἀκρασία εἰς τ- ἐναντίον αὐτοὺς ἐμβάλλειν ;
"As for Wisdom, the greatest blessing, does not incontinence exclude it and drive men to the opposite?"

1997	ἢ οὐ δοκεῖ σοι προσέχειν τε τοῖς ὠφελοῦσι καὶ καταμανθάνειν αὐτὰ κωλύειν , ἀφέλκουσα ἐπὶ τὰ ἡδέα , καὶ πολλάκις αἰσθανομένους τῶν ἀγαθῶν τε καὶ τῶν κακῶν ἐκπλήξασα ποιεῖν τὸ χεῖρον ἀντὶ τοῦ βελτίονος αἱρεῖσθαι ;
"Or don’t you think that incontinence prevents them from attending to useful things and understanding them, by drawing them away to things pleasant, and often so stuns their perception of good and evil that they choose the worse instead of the better?"

1998	γίγνεται τοῦτ’ , ἔφη .
"That does happen," [Euthydemus] replied.

1999	σωφροσύνης δέ , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , τίνι ἂν φαίημεν ἧττον ἢ τῷ ἀκρατεῖ προσήκειν ;
"With Prudence, Euthydemus, who, shall we say, has less to do than the incontinent?"

2000	αὐτὰ γὰρ δήπου τὰ ἐναντία σωφροσύνης καὶ ἀκρασίας ἔργα ἐστίν .
"For I presume that the actions prompted by prudence and incontinence are exact opposites?"

2001	ὁμολογῶ καὶ τοῦτο , ἔφη .
"I agree with that too," [Euthydemus] said.

2002	τοῦ δ’ ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ὧν προσήκει οἴει τι κωλυτικώτερον εἶναι ἀκρασίας ;
"To caring for what is right is there any stronger hindrance, do you think, than incontinence?"

2003	οὔκουν ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"Indeed I do not," [Euthydemus] replied.

2004	τοῦ δὲ ἀντὶ τῶν ὠφελούντων τὰ βλάπτοντα προαιρεῖσθαι ποιοῦντος καὶ τούτων μὲν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι , ἐκείνων δὲ ἀμελεῖν πείθοντος καὶ τοῖς σωφρονοῦσι τὰ ἐναντία ποιεῖν ἀναγκάζοντες οἴει τι ἀνθρώπῳ κάκιον εἶναι ;
"And do you think there can be anything worse for a man than that which causes him to choose the harmful rather than the useful, and persuades him to care for the one and to be careless of the other, and forces him to do the opposite of what prudence dictates?"

2005	οὐδέν , ἔφη .
"Nothing," [Euthydemus] replied.

2006	οὐκοῦν τὴν ἐγκράτειαν τῶν ἐναντίων ἢ τὴν ἀκρασίαν εἰκὸς τοῖς ἀνθρώποις αἰτίαν εἶναι ;
"And is it not likely that self-control causes actions the opposite of those that are due to incontinence?"

2007	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] said.

2008	οὐκοῦν καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων τὸ αἴτιον εἰκὸς ἄριστον εἶναι ;
"Then is not the cause of the opposite actions presumably a very great blessing?"

2009	εἰκὸς γάρ , ἔφη .
"Yes, presumably," [Euthydemus] replied.

2010	ἔοικεν ἄρ’ , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἄριστον ἀνθρώπῳ ἐγκράτεια εἶναι ;
"Consequently we may presume, Euthydemus, that self-control is a very great blessing to a man?"

2011 εἰκότως γάρ , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες .
"Yes, presumably," Euthydemus agreed with Socrates.

2012 ἐκεῖνο δέ , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἤδη πώποτε ἐνεθυμήθης ;
"Have you ever considered this, Euthydemus?"

2013 ποῖον ;
"What?"

2014 ἔφη .
He asked.

2015 ὅτι καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ ἡδέα , ἐφ’ ἅπερ μόνα δοκεῖ ἡ ἀκρασία τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ἄγειν , αὐτὴ μὲν οὐ δύναται ἄγειν , ἡ δ’ ἐγκράτεια πάντων μάλιστα ἥδεσθαι ποιεῖ .
"That though pleasure is the one and only goal to which incontinence is thought to lead men, she herself cannot bring them to it, whereas nothing produces pleasure so surely as self-control?"

2016 πῶς ;
"How so?"

2017 ἔφη .
He inquired.

2018 ἡ μὲν ἀκρασία οὐκ ἐῶσα καρτερεῖν οὔτε λιμὸν οὔτε δίψος οὔτε ἀφροδισίων ἐπιθυμίαν οὔτε ἀγρυπνίαν , δι’ ὧν μόνων ἔστιν ἡδέως μὲν φαγεῖν τε καὶ πιεῖν καὶ ἀφροδισιάσαι , ἡδέως δ’ ἀναπαύσασθαί τε καὶ κοιμηθῆναι , περιμείναντας καὶ ἀνασχομένους , ἕως ἂν ταῦτα ὡς ἔνι ἥδιστα γένηται , κωλύει τοῖς ἀναγκαιοτάτοις τε καὶ συνεχεστάτοις ἀξιολόγως ἥδεσθαι ·
"Incontinence will not let them endure hunger or thirst or desire or lack of sleep, which are the sole causes of pleasure in eating and drinking and sexual indulgence, and in resting and sleeping, after a time of waiting and resistance until the moment comes when these will give the greatest possible satisfaction; and thus she prevents them from experiencing any pleasure worthy to be mentioned in the most elementary and recurrent forms of enjoyment."

2019 ἡ δ’ ἐγκράτεια μόνη ποιοῦσα καρτερεῖν τὰ εἰρημένα μόνη καὶ ἥδεσθαι ποιεῖ ἀξίως μνήμης ἐπὶ τοῖς εἰρημένοις .
"But self-control alone causes them to endure the sufferings I have named, and therefore she alone causes them to experience any pleasure worth mentioning in such enjoyments."

2020 παντάπασιν , ἔφη , ἀληθῆ λέγεις .
"What you say is entirely true," Euthydemus agreed.

2021 ἀλλὰ μὴν τοῦ μαθεῖν τι καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθὸν καὶ τοῦ ἐπιμεληθῆναι τῶν τοιούτων τινός , δι’ ὧν ἄν τις καὶ τὸ ἑαυτοῦ σῶμα καλῶς διοικήσειε καὶ τὸν ἑαυτοῦ οἶκον καλῶς οἰκονομήσειε καὶ φίλοις καὶ πόλει ὠφέλιμος γένοιτο καὶ ἐχθρῶν κρατήσειεν , ἀφ’ ὧν οὐ μόνον ὠφέλειαι , ἀλλὰ καὶ ἡδοναὶ μέγισται γίγνονται , οἱ μὲν ἐγκρατεῖς ἀπολαύουσι πράττοντες αὐτά , οἱ δ’ ἀκρατεῖς οὐδενὸς μετέχουσι .
"Moreover, the delights of learning something good and excellent, and of studying some of the means whereby a man knows how to regulate his body well and manage his household successfully, to be useful to his friends and city and to defeat his enemies — knowledge that yields not only very great benefits but very great pleasures — these are the delights of the self-controlled; but the incontinent have no part in them."

2022 τῷ γὰρ ἂν ἧττον φήσαιμεν τῶν τοιούτων προσήκειν , ἢ ᾧ ἥκιστα ἔξεστι ταῦτα πράττειν , κατεχομένῳ ἐπὶ τῷ σπουδάζειν περὶ τὰς ἐγγυτάτω ἡδονάς ;
"For who, should we say, has less concern with these than he who has no power of cultivating them because all his serious purposes are centred in the pleasures that lie nearest?"

2023 καὶ ὁ Εὐθύδημος , δοκεῖς μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Σώκρατες , λέγειν ὡς ἀνδρὶ ἥττονι τῶν διὰ τοῦ σώματος ἡδονῶν πάμπαν οὐδεμιᾶς ἀρετῆς προσήκει .
Euthydemus said, "Socrates, I think you mean that he who is at the mercy of the bodily pleasures has no concern whatever with virtue in any form."

2024 τί γὰρ διαφέρει , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἄνθρωπος ἀκρατὴς θηρίου τοῦ ἀμαθεστάτου ;
"For how can an incontinent man be any better than the dullest beast?"

2025	ὅστις γὰρ τὰ μὲν κράτιστα μὴ σκοπεῖ , τὰ ἥδιστα δ’ ἐκ παντὸς τρόπου ζητεῖ ποιεῖν , τί ἂν διαφέροι τῶν ἀφρονεστάτων βοσκημάτων ;
"For how can an incontinent man be any better than the dullest beast? How can he who fails to consider the things that matter most, and strives by every means to do the things that are most pleasant, be better than the stupidest of creatures?"

2026	ἀλλὰ τοῖς ἐγκρατέσι μόνοις ἔξεστι σκοπεῖν τὰ κράτιστα τῶν πραγμάτων , καὶ λόγῳ καὶ ἔργῳ διαλέγοντας κατὰ γένη τὰ μὲν ἀγαθὰ προαιρεῖσθαι , τῶν δὲ κακῶν ἀπέχεσθαι .
"No, only the self-controlled have power to consider the things that matter most, and, sorting them out after their kind, by word and deed alike to prefer the good and reject the evil."

2027	καὶ οὕτως ἔφη ἀρίστους τε καὶ εὐδαιμονεστάτους ἄνδρας γίγνεσθαι καὶ διαλέγεσθαι δυνατωτάτους ·
"And thus, he said, men become supremely good and happy and skilled in discussion."

2028	ἔφη δὲ καὶ τὸ διαλέγεσθαι ὀνομασθῆναι ἐκ τοῦ συνιόντας κοινῇ βουλεύεσθαι διαλέγοντας κατὰ γένη τὰ πράγματα .
"The very word 'discussion,' according to him, owes its name to the practice of meeting together for common deliberation, sorting, discussing things after their kind."

2029	δεῖν οὖν πειρᾶσθαι ὅτι μάλιστα πρὸς τοῦτο ἑαυτὸν ἕτοιμον παρασκευάζειν καὶ τούτου μάλιστα ἐπιμελεῖσθαι ·
"And therefore one should be ready and prepared for this and be zealous for it; for it makes for excellence, leadership, and skill in discussion."

2030	ἐκ τούτου γὰρ γίγνεσθαι ἄνδρας ἀρίστους τε καὶ ἡγεμονικωτάτους καὶ διαλεκτικωτάτους .
"For from this practice come men who are the best, most capable of leadership, and most skilled in discussion."

2031	ὡς δὲ καὶ διαλεκτικωτέρους ἐποίει τοὺς συνόντας , πειράσομαι καὶ τοῦτο λέγειν .
"I will try also to show how he encouraged his companions to become skilled in discussion."

2032	Σωκράτης γὰρ τοὺς μὲν εἰδότας τί ἕκαστον εἴη τῶν ὄντων ἐνόμιζε καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἂν ἐξηγεῖσθαι δύνασθαι ·
"Socrates held that those who know what any given thing is can also expound it to others."

2033	τοὺς δὲ μὴ εἰδότας οὐδὲν ἔφη θαυμαστὸν εἶναι αὐτούς τε σφάλλεσθαι καὶ ἄλλους σφάλλειν ·
"On the other hand, those who do not know are misled themselves and mislead others."

2034	ὧν ἕνεκα σκοπῶν σὺν τοῖς συνοῦσι , τί ἕκαστον εἴη τῶν ὄντων , οὐδέποτ’ ἔληγε .
"For this reason he never gave up considering with his companions what any given thing is."

2035	πάντα μὲν οὖν ᾗ διωρίζετο πολὺ ἔργον ἂν εἴη διεξελθεῖν ·
"To go through all his definitions would be an arduous task."

2036	ἐν ὅσοις δὲ τὸν τρόπον τῆς ἐπισκέψεως δηλώσειν οἶμαι , τοσαῦτα λέξω .
"I will say only enough to indicate his method of analysis."

2037	πρῶτον δὲ περὶ εὐσεβείας ὧδέ πως ἐσκόπει ·
"His analysis of Piety — to take that first — was more or less as follows:"

2038	εἰπέ μοι , ἔφη , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ποῖόν τι νομίζεις εὐσέβειαν εἶναι ;
"Tell me, Euthydemus, what sort of thing is Piety, in your opinion?"

2039	καὶ ὅς , κάλλιστον νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη .
"A very excellent thing, to be sure," he replied.

2040	ἔχεις οὖν εἰπεῖν ὁποῖός τις ὁ εὐσεβής ἐστιν ;
"Can you say what sort of man is pious?"

2041	ἐμοὶ μὲν δοκεῖ , ἔφη , ὁ τοὺς θεοὺς τιμῶν .
"He who worships the gods, I think," Euthydemus replied.

2042	ἔξεστι δὲ ὃν ἄν τις βούληται τρόπον τοὺς θεοὺς τιμᾶν ;
"May a man worship the gods according to his own will and pleasure?"

2043	οὐκ ἀλλὰ νόμοι εἰσὶ καθ’ οὓς δεῖ τοὺς θεοὺς τιμᾶν .
"No, there are laws to be observed in worshipping the gods!"

2044	οὐκοῦν ὁ τοὺς νόμους τούτους εἰδὼς εἰδείη ἂν ὡς δεῖ τοὺς θεοὺς τιμᾶν ;
"Then will not he who knows these laws know how he must worship the gods?"

2045	οἶμαι ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2046	ἆρ’ οὖν ὁ εἰδὼς ὡς δεῖ τοὺς θεοὺς τιμᾶν οὐκ ἄλλως οἴεται δεῖν τοῦτο ποιεῖν ἢ ὡς οἶδεν ;
"Then does he who knows how he must worship the gods think that he must do so according to his knowledge, and not otherwise?"

2047	οὐ γὰρ οὖν , ἔφη .
"He does indeed," [Euthydemus] replied.

2048	ἄλλως δέ τις θεοὺς τιμᾷ ἢ ὡς οἴεται δεῖν ;
"And does everyone worship the gods as he thinks he ought, and not otherwise?"

2049	οὐκ οἶμαι , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2050	ὁ ἄρα τὰ περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς νόμιμα εἰδὼς νομίμως ἂν τοὺς θεοὺς τιμῴη ;
"Then will he who knows what is lawful about the gods worship the gods lawfully?"

2051	πάνυ μὲν οὖν .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] agreed.

2052	οὐκοῦν ὅ γε νομίμως τιμῶν ὡς δεῖ τιμᾷ ;
"Then does not he who worships lawfully worship as he ought?"

2053	πῶς γὰρ οὔ ;
"Of course," [Euthydemus] replied.

2054	ὁ δέ γε ὡς δεῖ τιμῶν εὐσεβής ἐστι ;
"Yes, but he who worships as he ought is pious?"

2055	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2056	ὁ ἄρα τὰ περὶ τοὺς θεοὺς νόμιμα εἰδὼς ὀρθῶς ἂν ἡμῖν εὐσεβὴς ὡρισμένος εἴη ;
"Shall we therefore rightly define the pious man as one who knows what is lawful concerning the gods?"

2057	ἐμοὶ γοῦν , ἔφη , δοκεῖ .
"I at any rate think so," [Euthydemus] said.

2058	ἀνθρώποις δὲ ἆρα ἔξεστιν ὃν ἄν τις τρόπον βούληται χρῆσθαι ;
"In dealing with men, again, may one do as one chooses?"

2059	οὐκ ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ τούτους ὁ εἰδὼς ἅ ἐστι νόμιμα καθ’ ἃ δεῖ πως ἀλλήλοις χρῆσθαι , νόμιμος ἂν εἴη .
"No, in the case of men too there are laws of conduct."

2060	οὐκοῦν οἱ κατὰ ταῦτα χρώμενοι ἀλλήλοις ὡς δεῖ χρῶνται ;
"Then do not those who observe them in their dealings with one another behave as they ought?"

2061	πῶς γὰρ οὔ ;
"Of course," [Euthydemus] replied.

2062	οὐκοῦν οἵ γε ὡς δεῖ χρώμενοι καλῶς χρῶνται ;
"And do not they who behave as they ought behave well?"

2063	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2064	οὐκοῦν οἵ γε τοῖς ἀνθρώποις καλῶς χρώμενοι καλῶς πράττουσι τὰ ἀνθρώπεια πράγματα ;
"And do not they who behave well towards men act well in human affairs?"

2065	εἰκός γ’ , ἔφη .
"Presumably," [Euthydemus] replied.

2066	οὐκοῦν οἱ τοῖς νόμοις πειθόμενοι δίκαια οὗτοι ποιοῦσι ;
"And do not those who obey the laws do what is just?"


2067 πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2068 δίκαια δὲ ἔφη , οἶσθα ὁποῖα καλεῖται ;
"Do you know what sort of things are called just?"

2069 ἃ οἱ νόμοι κελεύουσιν , ἔφη .
"The things that the laws command," [Euthydemus] replied.

2070 οἱ ἄρα ποιοῦντες ἃ οἱ νόμοι κελεύουσι δίκαιά τε ποιοῦσι καὶ ἃ δεῖ ;
"Consequently, those who do what the laws command do both what is just and what they must do?"

2071 πῶς γὰρ οὔ ;
"Of course," [Euthydemus] replied.

2072 οὐκοῦν οἵ γε τὰ δίκαια ποιοῦντες δίκαιοί εἰσιν ;
"And are not they who do what is just, just men?"

2073 οἴομαι ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2074 οἴει οὖν τινας πείθεσθαι τοῖς νόμοις μὴ εἰδότας ἃ οἱ νόμοι κελεύουσιν ;
"Do you think then, that any obey the laws without knowing what the laws command?"

2075 οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"I do not," [Euthydemus] replied.

2076 εἰδότας δὲ ἃ δεῖ ποιεῖν οἴει τινὰς οἴεσθαι δεῖν μὴ ταῦτα ποιεῖν ;
"And knowing what they must do, do you suppose that any think they must not do it?"

2077 οὐκ οἶμαι , ἔφη .
"I don’t think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2078 οἶδας δέ τινας ἄλλα ποιοῦντας ἢ ἃ οἴονται δεῖν ;
"Do you know of any who do, not what they think they must do, but something else?"

2079 οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"I do not," [Euthydemus] replied.

2080 οἱ ἄρα τὰ περὶ ἀνθρώπους νόμιμα εἰδότες οὗτοι τὰ δίκαια ποιοῦσι ;
"Consequently, those who know what is lawful concerning men do what is just?"

2081 πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2082 οὐκοῦν οἵ γε τὰ δίκαια ποιοῦντες δίκαιοί εἰσι ;
"But are not they who do what is just, just men?"

2083 τίνες γὰρ ἄλλοι ;
"Who else?" [Euthydemus] replied.

2084 ἔφη .
"Exactly."

2085 ὀρθῶς ἄν ποτε ἄρα ὁριζοίμεθα ὁριζόμενοι δικαίους εἶναι τοὺς εἰδότας τὰ περὶ ἀνθρώπους νόμιμα ;
"At last, then, we may rightly define just men as those who know what is lawful concerning men?"

2086 ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2087 σοφίαν δὲ τί ἂν φήσαιμεν εἶναι ;
"And what of Wisdom?"

2088 εἰπέ μοι , πότερά σοι δοκοῦσιν οἱ σοφοί , ἃ ἐπίστανται , ταῦτα σοφοὶ εἶναι , ἢ εἰσί τινες ἃ μὴ ἐπίστανται σοφοί ;
"How shall we describe it? Tell me, does it seem to you that the wise are wise about what they know, or are some wise about what they do not know?"

2089 ἃ ἐπίστανται δῆλον ὅτι , ἔφη ·
"About what they know, obviously; for how can a man be wise about the things he doesn’t know?"

2090 πῶς γὰρ ἄν τις , ἅ γε μὴ ἐπίσταιτο , ταῦτα σοφὸς εἴη ;
"How else can a man be wise if not by knowledge?"

2091 ἆρ’ οὖν οἱ σοφοὶ ἐπιστήμῃ σοφοί εἰσι ;
"The wise, then, are wise by knowledge?"

2092 τίνι γὰρ ἄν , ἔφη , ἄλλῳ τις εἴη σοφός , εἴ γε μὴ ἐπιστήμῃ ;
"How else can a man be wise if not by knowledge?"

2093 ἄλλο δέ τι σοφίαν οἴει εἶναι ἢ ᾧ σοφοί εἰσιν ;
"Do you think that wisdom is anything but that by which men are wise?"

2094 οὐκ ἔγωγε .
"No."

2095 ἐπιστήμη ἄρα σοφία ἐστίν ;
"It follows that Wisdom is Knowledge?"

2096 ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ .
"I think so."

2097 ἆρ’ οὖν δοκεῖ σοι ἀνθρώπῳ δυνατὸν εἶναι τὰ ὄντα πάντα ἐπίστασθαι ;
"Then do you think it possible for a man to know all things?"

2098 οὐδὲ μὰ Δί’ ἔμοιγε πολλοστὸν μέρος αὐτῶν .
"Of course not — nor even a fraction of them."

2099 πάντα μὲν ἄρα σοφὸν οὐχ οἷόν τε ἄνθρωπον εἶναι ;
"So an all-wise man is an impossibility?"

2100 μὰ Δί’ οὐ δῆτα , ἔφη .
"Of course, of course."

2101	ὃ ἄρα ἐπίσταται ἕκαστος , τοῦτο καὶ σοφός ἐστιν ;
"Consequently everyone is wise just in so far as he knows?"

2102	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ .
"I think so."

2101	ὃ ἄρα ἐπίσταται ἕκαστος , τοῦτο καὶ σοφός ἐστιν ;
"Consequently everyone is wise just in so far as he knows?"

2102	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] agreed.

2103	ἆρ’ οὖν , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , καὶ τ- ἀγαθὸν οὕτω ζητητέον ἐστί ;
"Now to seek the Good, Euthydemus: is this the way?"

2104	πῶς ;
"What do you mean?"

2105	ἔφη .
[Euthydemus] asked.

2106	δοκεῖ σοι τὸ αὐτὸ πᾶσιν ὠφέλιμον εἶναι ;
"Does it seem to you that the same thing is useful to everyone?"

2107	οὐκ ἔμοιγε .
"No," [Euthydemus] replied.

2108	τί δέ ;
"What then?"

2109	τὸ ἄλλῳ ὠφέλιμον οὐ δοκεῖ σοι ἐνίοτε ἄλλῳ βλαβερὸν εἶναι ;
"In fact, what is useful to one may sometimes be hurtful to another, don’t you think?"

2110	καὶ μάλα , ἔφη .
"Assuredly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2111	ἄλλο δ’ ἄν τι φαίης ἀγαθὸν εἶναι ἢ τὸ ὠφέλιμον ;
"Should you call anything good except what is useful?"

2112	οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"No," [Euthydemus] replied.

2113	τὸ ἄρα ὠφέλιμον ἀγαθόν ἐστιν ὅτῳ ἂν ὠφέλιμον ᾖ ;
"Consequently, what is useful is good for him to whom it is useful?"

2114	δοκεῖ μοι , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2115	τὸ δὲ καλὸν ἔχοιμεν ἄν πως ἄλλως εἰπεῖν ;
"Consider the Beautiful: can we define it in any other way?"

2116	ἤ , εἰ ἔστιν , ὀνομάζεις καλὸν ἢ σῶμα ἢ σκεῦος ἢ ἄλλ’ ὁτιοῦν , ὃ οἶσθα πρὸς πάντα καλὸν ὄν ;
"Or is it possible to name a beautiful body, for instance, or vessel, or anything else that you know to be beautiful for all purposes?"

2117	μὰ Δί’ οὐκ ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"Of course not," [Euthydemus] replied.

2118	ἆρ’ οὖν , πρὸς ὃ ἂν ἕκαστον χρήσιμον ᾖ , πρὸς τοῦτο ἑκάστῳ καλῶς ἔχει χρῆσθαι ;
"Then does the beauty in using anything consist in using it for just that purpose for which that particular thing is useful?"

2119	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2120	καλὸν δὲ πρὸς ἄλλο τί ἐστιν ἕκαστον ἢ πρὸς ὃ ἑκάστῳ καλῶς ἔχει χρῆσθαι ;
"And is a thing beautiful for any other purpose than that for which it is beautiful to use that particular thing?"

2121	οὐδὲ πρὸς ἓν ἄλλο , ἔφη .
"For no other purpose whatever," [Euthydemus] replied.

2122	τὸ χρήσιμον ἄρα καλόν ἐστι πρὸς ὃ ἂν ᾖ χρήσιμον ;
"The useful, then, is beautiful for any purpose for which it is useful?"

2123	ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ , ἔφη .
"I think so," [Euthydemus] replied.

2124	ἀνδρείαν δέ , ὦ Εὐθύδημε , ἆρα τῶν καλῶν νομίζεις εἶναι ;
"Next comes Courage, Euthydemus. Do you think it a beautiful thing?"

2125	κάλλιστον μὲν οὖν ἔγωγ’ , ἔφη .
"I prefer to say very beautiful," [Euthydemus] replied.

2126	χρήσιμον ἄρα οὐ πρὸς τὰ ἐλάχιστα νομίζεις τὴν ἀνδρείαν ;
"So you think Courage useful for no mean purposes?"

2127	νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , πρὸς τὰ μέγιστα μὲν οὖν .
"Of course — or rather, for the greatest," [Euthydemus] replied.

2128	ἆρ’ οὖν δοκεῖ σοι πρὸς τὰ δεινά τε καὶ ἐπικίνδυνα χρή

σιμον εἶναι τὸ ἀγνοεῖν αὐτά ;
"Then do you think that in the pressure of terrors and dangers it is useful to be ignorant of them?"

2129	ἥκιστά γ’ , ἔφη .
"By no means," [Euthydemus] replied.

2130	οἱ ἄρα μὴ φοβούμενοι τὰ τοιαῦτα διὰ τὸ μὴ εἰδέναι τί ἐστιν οὐκ ἀνδρεῖοί εἰσι ;
"So those who feel no fear of such things because they are ignorant of them are not courageous?"

2131	νὴ Δί’ , ἔφη , πολλοὶ γὰρ ἂν οὕτω γε τῶν τε μαινομένων καὶ τῶν δειλῶν ἀνδρεῖοι εἶεν .
"Of course not, for in that case many madmen and cowards would be courageous," [Euthydemus] replied.

2132	τί δὲ οἱ καὶ τὰ μὴ δεινὰ δεδοικότες ;
"What of those who are afraid when there is no ground for fear?"

2133	ἔτι γε νὴ Δί’ ἧττον , ἔφη .
"Still less, of course," [Euthydemus] replied.

2134	ἆρ’ οὖν τοὺς μὲν ἀγαθοὺς πρὸς τὰ δεινὰ καὶ ἐπικίνδυνα ὄντας ἀνδρείους ἡγῇ εἶναι , τοὺς δὲ κακοὺς δειλούς ;
"Then do you think that those who are good in the presence of terrors and dangers are courageous, and those who are bad are cowards?"

2135	πάνυ μὲν οὖν , ἔφη .
"Certainly," [Euthydemus] replied.

2136	ἀγαθοὺς δὲ πρὸς τὰ τοιαῦτα νομίζεις ἄλλους τινὰς ἢ τοὺς δυναμένους αὐτοῖς καλῶς χρῆσθαι ;
"And do you think that any are good in the presence of such things, except those who can deal with them well?"

2137	οὐκ ἀλλὰ τούτους , ἔφη .
"None but these," [Euthydemus] replied.

2138	κακοὺς δὲ ἄρα τοὺς οἵους τούτοις κακῶς χρῆσθαι ;
"And bad, except such as deal badly with them?"

2139	τίνας γὰρ ἄλλους ;
"These and none others," [Euthydemus] asked.

2141	ἆρ’ οὖν ἕκαστοι χρῶνται ὡς οἴονται δεῖν ;
"Then do both classes behave as they think they must?"

2142	πῶς γὰρ ἄλλως ;
"How can they behave otherwise?" [Euthydemus] replied.

2144	ἆρ’ οὖν οἱ μὴ δυνάμενοι καλῶς χρῆσθαι ἴσασιν ὡς δεῖ χρῆσθαι ;
"Then do those who cannot behave well know how they must behave?"

2145	οὐ δήπου γε , ἔφη .
"Surely not," [Euthydemus] replied.

2146	οἱ ἄρα εἰδότες ὡς δεῖ χρῆσθαι , οὗτοι καὶ δύνανται ;
"So those who know how they must behave are just those who can?"

2147	μόνοι γ’ , ἔφη .
"Yes, only they," [Euthydemus] replied.

2151	οἱ ἄρα κακῶς χρώμενοι διημαρτήκασιν ;
"So those who behave badly are utterly mistaken?"

2152	εἰκός γ’ , ἔφη .
"Presumably," [Euthydemus] replied.

2153	οἱ μὲν ἄρα ἐπιστάμενοι τοῖς δεινοῖς τε καὶ ἐπικινδύνοις καλῶς χρῆσθαι ἀνδρεῖοί εἰσιν , οἱ δὲ διαμαρτάνοντες τούτου δειλοί ;
"It follows that those who know how to deal well with terrors and dangers are courageous, and those who utterly mistake the way are cowards?"

2154	ἔμοιγε δοκοῦσιν , ἔφη .
"That is my opinion," [Euthydemus] replied.

2155	βασιλείαν δὲ καὶ τυραννίδα ἀρχὰς μὲν ἀμφοτέρας ἡγεῖτο εἶναι , διαφέρειν δὲ ἀλλήλων ἐνόμιζε .
"Kingship and despotism, in his judgment, were both forms of government, but he held that they differed."

2156	τὴν μὲν γὰρ ἑκόντων τε τῶν ἀνθρώπων καὶ κατὰ νόμους τῶν πόλεων ἀρχὴν βασιλείαν ἡγεῖτο , τὴν δὲ ἀκόντων τε καὶ μὴ κατὰ νόμους , ἀλλ’ ὅπως ὁ ἄρχων βούλοιτο , τυραννίδα .
"For government of men with their consent and in accordance with the laws of the state was kingship; while government of unwilling subjects and not controlled by laws, but imposed by the will of the ruler, was despotism."

2157	καὶ ὅπου μὲν ἐκ τῶν τὰ νόμιμα ἐπιτελούντων αἱ ἀρχαὶ καθίστανται , ταύτην μὲν τὴν πολιτείαν ἀριστοκρατίαν ἐνόμιζεν εἶναι , ὅπου δ’ ἐκ τιμημάτων , πλουτοκρατίαν , ὅπου δ’ ἐκ πάντων , δημοκρατίαν .
"And where the officials are chosen among those who fulfill the requirements of the laws, the constitution is an aristocracy; where rateable property is the qualification for office, a plutocracy; where all are eligible, a democracy."

2159	φῂς σὺ ἀμείνω πολίτην εἶναι ὃν σὺ ἐπαινεῖς ἢ ὃν ἐγώ ;
"Do you say that your man is a better citizen than mine?"

2160	φημὶ γὰρ οὖν .
"I do indeed."

2161	τί οὖν οὐκ ἐκεῖνο πρῶτον ἐπεσκεψάμεθα , τί ἐστιν ἔργον ἀγαθοῦ πολίτου ;
"Then why didn’t we first consider what is the function of a good citizen?"

2163	οὐκοῦν ἐν μὲν χρημάτων διοικήσει κρατοίη ἂν ὁ χρήμασιν εὐπορωτέραν τὴν πόλιν ποιῶν ;
"In financial administration, then, is not the better man he who makes the city wealthier?"

2165	ἐν δέ γε πολέμῳ ὁ καθυπερτέραν τῶν ἀντιπάλων ;
"And in war he who makes her stronger than her rivals?"


2166 πῶς γὰρ οὔ;
How not?

2167 ἐν δὲ πρεσβείᾳ ἆρ’ ὃς ἂν φίλους ἀντὶ πολεμίων παρασκευάζῃ;
And on an embassy he who turns enemies into friends?

2168 εἰκός γε.
Presumably.

2169 οὐκοῦν καὶ ἐν δημηγορίᾳ ὁ στάσεις τε παύων καὶ ὁμόνοιαν ἐμποιῶν;
And in debate he who puts down strife and produces harmony?

2170 ἔμοιγε δοκεῖ.
I think so.

2171 οὕτω δὲ τῶν λόγων ἐπαναγομένων καὶ τοῖς ἀντιλέγουσιν αὐτοῖς φανερὸν ἐγίγνετο τ- ἀληθές.
By this process of leading back the argument even his adversary came to see the truth clearly.

2172 ὁπότε δὲ αὐτός τι τῷ λόγῳ διεξίοι, διὰ τῶν μάλιστα ὁμολογουμένων ἐπορεύετο, νομίζων ταύτην τὴν ἀσφάλειαν εἶναι λόγου.
Whenever he himself argued out a question, he advanced by steps that gained general assent, holding this to be the only sure method.

2173 τοιγαροῦν πολὺ μάλιστα ὧν ἐγὼ οἶδα, ὅτε λέγοι, τοὺς ἀκούοντας ὁμολογοῦντας παρεῖχε.
Accordingly, whenever he argued, he gained a greater measure of assent from his hearers than any man I have known.

2174 ἔφη δὲ καὶ Ὅμηρον τῷ Ὀδυσσεῖ ἀναθεῖναι τὸ ἀσφαλῆ ῥήτορα εἶναι, ὡς ἱκανὸν αὐτὸν ὄντα διὰ τῶν δοκούντων τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἄγειν τοὺς λόγους.
He said that Homer gave Odysseus the credit of being a safe speaker because he had a way of leading the discussion from one acknowledged truth to another.

2175 ὅτι μὲν οὖν ἁπλῶς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γνώμην ἀπεφαίνετο Σωκράτης πρὸς τοὺς ὁμιλοῦντας αὐτῷ, δοκεῖ μοι δῆλον ἐκ τῶν εἰρημένων εἶναι.
I think that I have said enough to show that Socrates stated his own opinion plainly to those who consorted with him.

2176	ὅτι δὲ καὶ αὐτάρκεις ἐν ταῖς προσηκούσαις πράξεσιν αὐτοὺς εἶναι ἐπεμελεῖτο, νῦν τοῦτο λέξω.
I will now show that he also took pains to make them independent in doing the work that they were fitted for.

2177	πάντων μὲν γὰρ ὧν ἐγὼ οἶδα μάλιστα ἔμελεν αὐτῷ εἰδέναι ὅτου τις ἐπιστήμων εἴη τῶν συνόντων αὐτῷ.
For I never knew a man who was so careful to discover what each of his companions knew.

2178	ὧν δὲ προσήκει ἀνδρὶ καλῷ κ- ἀγαθῷ εἰδέναι, ὅ τι μὲν αὐτὸς εἰδείη, πάντων προθυμότατα ἐδίδασκεν.
Whatever it befits a gentleman to know he taught most zealously, so far as his own knowledge extended.

2179	ὅτου δὲ αὐτὸς ἀπειρότερος εἴη, πρὸς τοὺς ἐπισταμένους ἦγεν αὐτούς.
If he was not entirely familiar with a subject, he took them to those who knew.

2180	ἐδίδασκε δὲ καὶ μέχρι ὅτου δέοι ἔμπειρον εἶναι ἑκάστου πράγματος τὸν ὀρθῶς πεπαιδευμένον.
He also taught them how far a well-educated man should make himself familiar with any given subject.

2181	αὐτίκα γεωμετρίαν μέχρι μὲν τούτου ἔφη δεῖν μανθάνειν, ἕως ἱκανός τις γένοιτο, εἴ ποτε δεήσειε, γῆν μέτρῳ ὀρθῶς ἢ παραλαβεῖν ἢ παραδοῦναι ἢ διανεῖμαι ἢ ἔργον ἀποδείξασθαι.
For instance, he said that the study of geometry should be pursued until the student was competent to measure a parcel of land accurately in case he wanted to take over, convey or divide it, or to compute the yield.

2182	οὕτω δὲ τοῦτο ῥᾴδιον εἶναι μαθεῖν ὥστε τὸν προσέχοντα τὸν νοῦν τῇ μετρήσει ἅμα τήν τε γῆν ὁπόση ἐστὶν εἰδέναι καὶ ὡς μετρεῖται ἐπιστάμενον ἀπιέναι.
And this knowledge was so easy to acquire, that anyone who gave his mind to mensuration knew the size of the piece and carried away a knowledge of the principles of land measurement.

2183	τὸ δὲ μέχρι τῶν δυσσυνέτων διαγραμμάτων γεωμετρίαν μανθάνειν ἀπεδοκίμαζεν.
He was against carrying the study of geometry so far as to include the more complicated figures, on the ground that he could not see the use of them.

2184	ὅ τι μὲν γὰρ ὠφελοίη ταῦτα, οὐκ ἔφη ὁρᾶν.
Not that he was himself unfamiliar with them, but he said that they were enough to occupy a lifetime, to the complete exclusion of many other useful studies.

2185	καίτοι οὐκ ἄπειρός γε αὐτῶν ἦν.
Not that he was himself unfamiliar with them,

2186	ἔφη δὲ ταῦτα ἱκανὰ εἶναι ἀνθρώπου βίον κατατρίβειν καὶ ἄλλων πολλῶν τε καὶ ὠφελίμων μαθημάτων ἀποκωλύειν.
but he said that they were enough to occupy a lifetime, to the complete exclusion of many other useful studies.

2187	ἐκέλευε δὲ καὶ ἀστρολογίας ἐμπείρους γίγνεσθαι, καὶ ταύτης μέντοι μέχρι τοῦ νυκτός τε ὥραν καὶ μηνὸς καὶ ἐνιαυτοῦ δύνασθαι γιγνώσκειν ἕνεκα πορείας τε καὶ πλοῦ καὶ φυλακῆς, καὶ ὅσα ἄλλα ἢ νυκτὸς ἢ μηνὸς ἢ ἐνιαυτοῦ πράττεται, πρὸς ταῦτ’ ἔχειν τεκμηρίοις χρῆσθαι, τὰς ὥρας τῶν εἰρημένων διαγιγνώσκοντας.
Similarly, he recommended them to make themselves familiar with astronomy, but only so far as to be able to find the time of night, month, and year, in order to use reliable evidence when planning a journey by land or sea, or setting the watch, and in all other affairs that are done in the night or month or year, by distinguishing the times and seasons aforesaid.

2188	καὶ ταῦτα δὲ ῥᾴδια εἶναι μαθεῖν παρά τε νυκτοθηρῶν καὶ κυβερνητῶν καὶ ἄλλων πολλῶν οἷς ἐπιμελὲς ταῦτα εἰδέναι.
This knowledge, again, was easily to be had from night hunters and pilots and others who made it their business to know such things.

2189	τὸ δὲ μέχρι τούτου ἀστρονομίαν μανθάνειν, μέχρι τοῦ καὶ τὰ μὴ ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ περιφορᾷ ὄντα, καὶ τοὺς πλάνητάς τε καὶ ἀσταθμήτους ἀστέρας γνῶναι, καὶ τὰς ἀποστάσεις αὐτῶν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς καὶ τὰς περιόδους καὶ τὰς αἰτίας αὐτῶν ζητοῦντας κατατρίβεσθαι, ἰσχυρῶς ἀπέτρεπεν.
But he strongly deprecated studying astronomy so far as to include the knowledge of bodies revolving in different courses, and of planets and comets, and wearing oneself out with the calculation of their distance from the earth, their periods of revolution, and the causes of these.

2190	ὠφέλειαν μὲν γὰρ οὐδεμίαν οὐδ’ ἐν τούτοις ἔφη ὁρᾶν.
Of such researches, again he said that he could not see what useful purpose they served.

I apologize for the incomplete response earlier. Here are the remaining sentences up to 2195:

2191	καίτοι οὐδὲ τούτων γε ἀνήκοος ἦν.
He had indeed attended lectures on these subjects too;

2192	ἔφη δὲ καὶ ταῦτα ἱκανὰ εἶναι κατατρίβειν ἀνθρώπου βίον καὶ πολλῶν καὶ ὠφελίμων ἀποκωλύειν.
but these again, he said, were enough to occupy a lifetime to the complete exclusion of many useful studies.

2193	ὅλως δὲ τῶν οὐρανίων, ᾗ ἕκαστα ὁ θεὸς μηχανᾶται, φροντιστὴν γίγνεσθαι ἀπέτρεπεν.
In general, with regard to the phenomena of the heavens, he deprecated curiosity to learn how the deity contrives them:

2194	οὔτε γὰρ εὑρετὰ ἀνθρώποις αὐτὰ ἐνόμιζεν εἶναι οὔτε χαρίζεσθαι θεοῖς ἂν ἡγεῖτο τὸν ζητοῦντα ἃ ἐκεῖνοι σαφηνίσαι οὐκ ἐβουλήθησαν.
he held that their secrets could not be discovered by man, and believed that any attempt to search out what the gods had not chosen to reveal must be displeasing to them.

2195	κινδυνεῦσαι δ’ ἂν ἔφη καὶ παραφρονῆσαι τὸν ταῦτα μεριμνῶντα οὐδὲν ἧττον ἢ Ἀναξαγόρας παρεφρόνησεν ὁ μέγιστον φρονήσας ἐπὶ τῷ τὰς τῶν θεῶν μηχανὰς ἐξηγεῖσθαι.
He said that he who meddles with these matters runs the risk of losing his sanity as completely as Anaxagoras, who took an insane pride in his explanation of the divine machinery.

2196 ἐκεῖνος γὰρ λέγων μὲν τὸ αὐτὸ εἶναι πῦρ τε καὶ ἥλιον ἠγνόει ὅτι τὸ μὲν πῦρ οἱ ἄνθρωποι ῥᾳδίως καθορῶσιν, εἰς δὲ τὸν ἥλιον οὐ δύνανται ἀντιβλέπειν, καὶ ὑπὸ μὲν τοῦ ἡλίου καταλαμπόμενοι τὰ χρώματα μελάντερα ἔχουσιν, ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ πυρὸς οὔ.
For that sage, in declaring the sun to be fire, ignored the facts that men can look at fire without inconvenience, but cannot gaze steadily at the sun; that their skin is blackened by the sun’s rays, but not by fire.

2197 ἠγνόει δὲ καὶ ὅτι τῶν ἐκ τῆς γῆς φυομένων ἄνευ μὲν ἡλίου αὐγῆς οὐδὲν δύναται καλῶς αὔξεσθαι, ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ πυρὸς θερμαινόμενα πάντα ἀπόλλυται.
Further, he ignored the fact that sunlight is essential to the health of all vegetation, whereas if anything is heated by fire it withers.

2198 φάσκων δὲ τὸν ἥλιον λίθον διάπυρον εἶναι καὶ τοῦτο ἠγνόει, ὅτι λίθος μὲν ἐν πυρὶ ὢν οὔτε λάμπει οὔτε πολὺν χρόνον ἀντέχει, ὁ δὲ ἥλιος πάντα τὸν χρόνον πάντων λαμπρότατος ὢν διαμένει.
Again, when he pronounced the sun to be a red-hot stone, he ignored the fact that a stone in fire neither glows nor can resist it long, whereas the sun shines with unequalled brilliance forever.

2199 ἐκέλευε δὲ καὶ λογισμοὺς μανθάνειν.
He also recommended the study of arithmetic.

2200 καὶ τούτων δὲ ὁμοίως τοῖς ἄλλοις ἐκέλευε φυλάττεσθαι τὴν μάταιον πραγματείαν, μέχρι δὲ τοῦ ὠφελίμου πάντα καὶ αὐτὸς συνεσκόπει καὶ συνδιεξῄει τοῖς συνοῦσι.
But in this case as in the others he recommended avoidance of vain application; and invariably, whether theories or ascertained facts formed the subject of his conversation, he limited it to what was useful.

2201	προέτρεπε δὲ σφόδρα καὶ ὑγιείας ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τοὺς συνόντας παρά τε τῶν εἰδότων μανθάνοντας ὅσα ἐνδέχοιτο, καὶ ἑαυτῷ ἕκαστον προσέχοντα διὰ παντὸς τοῦ βίου, τί βρῶμα ἢ τί πῶμα ἢ ποῖος πόνος συμφέροι αὐτῷ, καὶ πῶς τούτοις χρώμενος ὑγιεινότατ’ ἂν διάγοι.
He also strongly urged his companions to take care of their health. "You should find out all you can," he said, "from those who know. Everyone should watch himself throughout his life, and notice what sort of meat and drink and what form of exercise suit his constitution, and how he should regulate them in order to enjoy good health. For by such attention to yourselves you can discover better than any doctor what suits your constitution."

2202	τοῦ γὰρ οὕτω προσέχοντος ἑαυτῷ ἔργον ἔφη εἶναι εὑρεῖν ἰατρὸν τὰ πρὸς ὑγίειαν συμφέροντα αὐτῷ μᾶλλον διαγιγνώσκοντα αὑτοῦ.
"For he who pays such attention to himself," he said, "is more likely to find a doctor who can diagnose what is beneficial for his health than anyone else."


2203 εἰ δέ τις μᾶλλον ἢ κατὰ τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην σοφίαν ὠφελεῖσθαι βούλοιτο, συνεβούλευε μαντικῆς ἐπιμελεῖσθαι.
When anyone was in need of help that human wisdom was unable to give, he advised him to resort to divination.

2204 τὸν γὰρ εἰδότα δι’ ὧν οἱ θεοὶ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις περὶ τῶν πραγμάτων σημαίνουσιν οὐδέποτ’ ἔρημον ἔφη γίγνεσθαι συμβουλῆς θεῶν.
For he who knew the means whereby the gods give guidance to men concerning their affairs never lacked divine counsel.

2205 εἰ δέ τις, ὅτι φάσκοντος αὐτοῦ τὸ δαιμόνιον ἑαυτῷ προσημαίνειν ἅ τε δέοι καὶ ἃ μὴ δέοι ποιεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν κατεγνώσθη θάνατος, οἴεται αὐτὸν ἐλέγχεσθαι περὶ τοῦ δαιμονίου ψευδόμενον, ἐννοησάτω πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι οὕτως ἤδη τότε πόρρω τῆς ἡλικίας ἦν, ὥστ’, εἰ καὶ μὴ τότε, οὐκ ἂν πολλῷ ὕστερον τελευτῆσαι τὸν βίον.
As for his claim that he was forewarned by "the deity" what he ought to do and what not to do, some may think that it must have been a delusion because he was condemned to death. But they should remember two facts: first, he had already reached such an age, that had he not died then, death must have come to him soon after.

2206 εἶτα ὅτι τὸ μὲν ἀχθεινότατόν τε τοῦ βίου καὶ ἐν ᾧ πάντες τὴν διάνοιαν μειοῦνται ἀπέλιπεν, ἀντὶ δὲ τούτου τῆς ψυχῆς τὴν ῥώμην ἐπιδειξάμενος εὔκλειαν προσεκτήσατο, τήν τε δίκην πάντων ἀνθρώπων ἀληθέστατα καὶ ἐλευθεριώτατα καὶ δικαιότατα εἰπὼν καὶ τὴν κατάγνωσιν τοῦ θανάτου πραότατα καὶ ἀνδρωδέστατα ἐνέγκας.
Secondly, he escaped the most irksome stage of life and the inevitable diminution of mental powers, and instead won glory by the moral strength revealed in the wonderful honesty and frankness and probity of his defense, and in the equanimity and manliness with which he bore the sentence of death.

2207 ὁμολογεῖται γὰρ οὐδένα πω τῶν μνημονευομένων ἀνθρώπων κάλλιον θάνατον ἐνεγκεῖν.
In fact, it is admitted that there is no record of death more nobly borne.

2208 ἀνάγκη μὲν γὰρ ἐγένετο αὐτῷ μετὰ τὴν κρίσιν τριάκοντα ἡμέρας βιῶναι διὰ τὸ Δήλια μὲν ἐκείνου τοῦ μηνὸς εἶναι, τὸν δὲ νόμον μηδένα ἐᾶν δημοσίᾳ ἀποθνῄσκειν ἕως ἂν ἡ θεωρία ἐκ Δήλου ἐπανέλθῃ, καὶ τὸν χρόνον τοῦτον ἅπασι τοῖς συνήθεσι φανερὸς ἐγένετο οὐδὲν ἀλλοιότερον διαβιοὺς ἢ τὸν ἔμπροσθεν χρόνον.
For he was forced to live for thirty days after the verdict was given, because it was the month of the Dêlia, and the law did not allow any public execution to take place until the sacred embassy had returned from Delos. During this interval, as all his intimate acquaintances could see, he continued to live exactly as before.

2209	καίτοι τὸν ἔμπροσθέν γε πάντων ἀνθρώπων μάλιστα ἐθαυμάζετο ἐπὶ τῷ εὐθύμως τε καὶ εὐκόλως ζῆν.
And, in truth, before that time he had been admired above all men for his cheerfulness and serenity.

2210 καὶ πῶς ἄν τις κάλλιον ἢ οὕτως ἀποθάνοι;
How, then, could a man die more nobly?

2211 ἢ ποῖος ἂν εἴη θάνατος καλλίων ἢ ὃν κάλλιστά τις ἀποθάνοι;
Or what death could be nobler than the death most nobly faced?

2212 ποῖος δ’ ἂν γένοιτο θάνατος εὐδαιμονέστερος τοῦ καλλίστου;
What death more blessed than the noblest?

2213 ἢ ποῖος θεοφιλέστερος τοῦ εὐδαιμονεστάτου;
Or what dearer to the gods than the most blessed?

2214 λέξω δὲ καὶ ἃ Ἑρμογένους τοῦ Ἱππονίκου ἤκουσα περὶ αὐτοῦ.
I will repeat what Hermogenes, son of Hipponicus, told me about him.

2215 ἔφη γάρ, ἤδη Μελήτου γεγραμμένου αὐτὸν τὴν γραφήν, αὐτὸς ἀκούων αὐτοῦ πάντα μᾶλλον ἢ περὶ τῆς δίκης διαλεγομένου λέγειν αὐτῷ ὡς χρὴ σκοπεῖν ὅ τι ἀπολογήσεται.
"When Meletus had actually formulated his indictment," he said, "Socrates talked freely in my presence, but made no reference to the case. I told him that he ought to be thinking about his defence."

2216 τὸν δὲ τὸ μὲν πρῶτον εἰπεῖν:
His first remark was,

2217 οὐ γὰρ δοκῶ σοι τοῦτο μελετῶν διαβεβιωκέναι;
"Don’t you think that I have been preparing for it all my life?"

2218 ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐτὸν ἤρετο ὅπως, εἰπεῖν αὐτὸν ὅτι οὐδὲν ἄλλο ποιῶν διαγεγένηται ἢ διασκοπῶν μὲν τά τε δίκαια καὶ τὰ ἄδικα, πράττων δὲ τὰ δίκαια καὶ τῶν ἀδίκων ἀπεχόμενος, ἥνπερ νομίζοι καλλίστην μελέτην ἀπολογίας εἶναι.
And when I asked him how, he said that he had been constantly occupied in the consideration of right and wrong, and in doing what was right and avoiding what was wrong, which he regarded as the best preparation for a defence.

2219 αὐτὸς δὲ πάλιν εἰπεῖν:
Then I said,

2220	οὐχ ὁρᾷς, ὦ Σώκρατες, ὅτι οἱ Ἀθήνησι δικασταὶ πολλοὺς μὲν ἤδη μηδὲν ἀδικοῦντας λόγῳ παραχθέντες ἀπέκτειναν, πολλοὺς δὲ ἀδικοῦντας ἀπέλυσαν;
"Don’t you see, Socrates, that the juries in our courts are apt to be misled by argument, so that they often put the innocent to death, and acquit the guilty?"

2221	ἀλλὰ νὴ τὸν Δία, φάναι αὐτόν, ὦ Ἑρμόγενες, ἤδη μου ἐπιχειροῦντος φροντίσαι τῆς πρὸς τοὺς δικαστὰς ἀπολογίας ἠναντιώθη τὸ δαιμόνιον.
"Ah, yes, Hermogenes," he answered, "but when I did try to think out my defence to the jury, the deity at once resisted."

2222	καὶ αὐτὸς εἰπεῖν:
"And I said,"

2223	θαυμαστὰ λέγεις.
"Strange words,"

2224	τὸν δέ, θαυμάζεις, φάναι, εἰ τῷ θεῷ δοκεῖ βέλτιον εἶναι ἐμὲ τελευτᾶν τὸν βίον ἤδη;
and he replied, "Do you think it strange, if it seems better to God that I should die now?"

2225	οὐκ οἶσθ’ ὅτι μέχρι μὲν τοῦδε τοῦ χρόνου ἐγὼ οὐδενὶ ἀνθρώπων ὑφείμην ἂν οὔτε βέλτιον οὔθ’ ἥδιον ἐμαυτοῦ βεβιωκέναι;
"Don’t you see that to this day I never would acknowledge that any man had lived a better or a pleasanter life than I?"

2226	ἄριστα μὲν γὰρ οἶμαι ζῆν τοὺς ἄριστα ἐπιμελομένους τοῦ ὡς βελτίστους γίγνεσθαι, ἥδιστα δὲ τοὺς μάλιστα αἰσθανομένους ὅτι βελτίους γίγνονται.
"For they live best, I think, who strive best to become as good as possible; and the pleasantest life is theirs who are conscious that they are growing in goodness."

2227	ἃ ἐγὼ μέχρι τοῦδε τοῦ χρόνου ᾐσθανόμην ἐμαυτῷ συμβαίνοντα, καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀνθρώποις ἐντυγχάνων καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους παραθεωρῶν ἐμαυτὸν οὕτω διατετέλεκα περὶ ἐμαυτοῦ γιγνώσκων:
"And to this day that has been my experience; and mixing with others and closely comparing myself with them, I have held without ceasing to this opinion of myself."

2228 καὶ οὐ μόνον ἐγώ, ἀλλὰ καὶ οἱ ἐμοὶ φίλοι οὕτως ἔχοντες περὶ ἐμοῦ διατελοῦσιν, οὐ διὰ τὸ φιλεῖν ἐμέ, καὶ γὰρ οἱ τοὺς ἄλλους φιλοῦντες οὕτως ἂν εἶχον πρὸς τοὺς ἑαυτῶν φίλους, ἀλλὰ διόπερ καὶ αὐτοὶ ἂν οἴονται ἐμοὶ συνόντες βέλτιστοι γίγνεσθαι.
"And not I only, but my friends also cease not to feel thus towards me, not because of their love for me (for why does not love make others feel thus towards their friends?), but because they think that they too would rise highest in goodness by being with me."

2229	εἰ δὲ βιώσομαι πλείω χρόνον, ἴσως ἀναγκαῖον ἔσται τὰ τοῦ γήρως ἐπιτελεῖσθαι καὶ ὁρᾶν τε καὶ ἀκούειν ἧττον καὶ διανοεῖσθαι χεῖρον καὶ δυσμαθέστερον ἀποβαίνειν καὶ ἐπιλησμονέστερον, καὶ ὧν πρότερον βελτίων ἦν, τούτων χείρω γίγνεσθαι.
"But if I am to live on, haply I may be forced to pay the old man’s forfeit — to become sand-blind and deaf and dull of wit, slower to learn, quicker to forget, outstripped now by those who were behind me."

2230	ἀλλὰ μὴν ταῦτά γε μὴ αἰσθανομένῳ μὲν ἀβίωτος ἂν εἴη ὁ βίος, αἰσθανόμενον δὲ πῶς οὐκ ἀνάγκη χεῖρόν τε καὶ ἀηδέστερον ζῆν;
"Nay, but even were I unconscious of the change, life would be a burden to me; and if I knew, misery and bitterness would surely be my lot."

2231	ἀλλὰ μὴν εἴ γε ἀδίκως ἀποθανοῦμαι, τοῖς μὲν ἀδίκως ἐμὲ ἀποκτείνασιν αἰσχρὸν ἂν εἴη τοῦτο.
"But now, if I am to die unjustly, they who unjustly kill me will bear the shame of it."

2232	εἰ γὰρ τὸ ἀδικεῖν αἰσχρόν ἐστι, πῶς οὐκ αἰσχρὸν καὶ τὸ ἀδίκως ὁτιοῦν ποιεῖν;
"For if to do injustice is shameful, whatever is unjustly done must surely bring shame."

2233	ἐμοὶ δὲ τί αἰσχρὸν τὸ ἑτέρους μὴ δύνασθαι περὶ ἐμοῦ τὰ δίκαια μήτε γνῶναι μήτε ποιῆσαι;
"But to me what shame is it that others fail to decide and act justly concerning me?"

2234	ὁρῶ δ’ ἔγωγε καὶ τὴν δόξαν τῶν προγεγονότων ἀνθρώπων ἐν τοῖς ἐπιγιγνομένοις οὐχ ὁμοίαν καταλειπομένην τῶν τε ἀδικησάντων καὶ τῶν ἀδικηθέντων.
"I see that posterity judges differently of the dead according as they did or suffered injustice."

2235	οἶδα δ’ ὅτι καὶ ἐγὼ ἐπιμελείας τεύξομαι ὑπ’ ἀνθρώπων, καὶ ἐὰν νῦν ἀποθάνω, οὐχ ὁμοίως τοῖς ἐμὲ ἀποκτείνασιν.
"I know that men will remember me too, and, if I die now, not as they will remember those who took my life."

2236	οἶδα γὰρ ἀεὶ μαρτυρήσεσθαί μοι ὅτι ἐγὼ ἠδίκησα μὲν οὐδένα πώποτε ἀνθρώπων οὐδὲ χείρω ἐποίησα, βελτίους δὲ ποιεῖν ἐπειρώμην ἀεὶ τοὺς ἐμοὶ συνόντας.
"For I know that they will ever testify of me that I wronged no man at any time, nor corrupted any man, but strove ever to make my companions better."

2237	τοιαῦτα μὲν πρὸς Ἑρμογένην τε διελέχθη καὶ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλους.
"These were the things he discussed both with Hermogenes and with others."

2238	τῶν δὲ Σωκράτην γιγνωσκόντων , οἷος ἦν , οἱ ἀρετῆς ἐφιέμενοι πάντες ἔτι καὶ νῦν διατελοῦσι πάντων μάλιστα ποθοῦντες ἐκεῖνον , ὡς ὠφελιμώτατον ὄντα πρὸς ἀρετῆς ἐπιμέλειαν . This was the tenor of his conversation with Hermogenes and with the others. All who knew what manner of man Socrates was and who seek after virtue continue to this day to miss him beyond all others, as the chief of helpers in the quest of virtue.


2239	ἐμοὶ μὲν δή , τοιοῦτος ὢν οἷον ἐγὼ διήγημαι , εὐσεβὴς μὲν οὕτως ὥστε μηδὲν ἄνευ τῆς τῶν θεῶν γνώμης ποιεῖν , δίκαιος δὲ ὥστε βλάπτειν μὲν μηδὲ μικρὸν μηδένα , ὠφελεῖν δὲ τὰ μέγιστα τοὺς χρωμένους αὐτῷ , ἐγκρατὴς δὲ ὥστε μηδέποτε προαιρεῖσθαι τὸ ἥδιον ἀντὶ τοῦ βελτίονος , φρόνιμος δὲ ὥστε μὴ διαμαρτάνειν κρίνων τὰ βελτίω καὶ τὰ χείρω μηδὲ ἄλλου προσδεῖσθαι , ἀλλ’ αὐτάρκης εἶναι πρὸς τὴν τούτων γνῶσιν , ἱκανὸς δὲ καὶ λόγῳ εἰπεῖν τε καὶ διορίσασθαι τὰ τοιαῦτα , ἱκανὸς δὲ καὶ ἄλλως δοκιμάσαι τε καὶ ἁμαρτάνοντα ἐλέγξαι καὶ προτρέψασθαι ἐπ’ ἀρετὴν καὶ καλοκαγαθίαν , ἐδόκει τοιοῦτος εἶναι οἷος ἂν εἴη ἄριστός τε ἀνὴρ καὶ εὐδαιμονέστατος .
For myself, I have described him as he was: so religious that he did nothing without counsel from the gods; so just that he did no injury, however small, to any man, but conferred the greatest benefits on all who dealt with him; so self-controlled that he never chose the pleasanter rather than the better course; so wise that he was unerring in his judgment of the better and the worse, and needed no counsellor, but relied on himself for his knowledge of them; masterly in expounding and defining such things; no less masterly in putting others to the test, and convincing them of error and exhorting them to follow virtue and gentleness. To me then he seemed to be all that a truly good and happy man must be.

2240	εἰ δέ τῳ μὴ ἀρέσκει ταῦτα , παραβάλλων τὸ ἄλλων ἦθος πρὸς ταῦτα οὕτω κρινέτω .

But if there is any doubter, let him set the character of other men beside these things; then let him judge.