GROUPS OF RELATED WORDS.

Tue Greek groups contain only words found in Xenophon’s Anab-
asis, except a few needed as connectives or to show the development
of the group. Compound verbs and proper names have generally been
omitted.

In the Greek groups, simple words whose formation is to be spe-
cially noted are printed in black-face letter. These are generally
formed on a stem derived directly from a root (not always determin-
able) or from an ultimate theme. Simple words, on the contrary,
which are formed on a stem derived from a stem that either appears
in some preceding word or may easily be assumed, and compounds,
are generally printed in light-face letter. Adjectives in -ros and -reos
are treated as verb-forms.

The eye is assisted in the analysis of the words by the use of
hyphens, which mark off case-endings and personal endings and
suffixes (except in some verbs, principally denominatives), and sepa-
rate the parts of compounds.

For fuller information about the words in the Latin groups, see
the Table of Roots in Lewis’s Latin Dictionary for Schools or in his
Elementary Latin Dictionary.

In the English groups, words in small capitals are cognates,
those in black-face letter are borrowed words. For fuller information
about the English words here given. see Skeat’s Etymological Diction-
ary of the English Language.

R. ay, ag, drive, lead, weigh.

ay-w, drive, lead, bring ; aya-v, adv, (orig. an acc.), very, exceedingly,
(‘in a driving manner’); ay-v, dv-os, 0, a bringing together, assembly,
public contest ; dywr-o-0érn-s, ov (cf. R. 0e), judge of a contest ; aywvifo-
par, contend, fight, engage; avr-aywrlfo-ua, struggle against, rival ;
Gy-pa, as, the chase, booty; daypev-w, take in the chase, catch; &yp-
urvo-s, o-v (Cf. Umvos), hunting after sleep, wakeful; aypumvé-w, lie
awake ; Swypé-w (= fwo-aype-w, see fwé-s, alive), take alive; ay-pé-s, 0,
field (place where cattle are driven); dyp-to-s, a, o-v, ranging the fields,

247

Digitized by Original from
INTERNET ARCHIVE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
