re

2 GREEK TEXT-BOOKS.

Anabasis Dictionary.

An Illustrated Dictionary to Xenophon’s Anabasis, with groups of words
etymologically related. By JoHNn WiLLiaAmMs WuHire, Professor of
Greek, and Morris H. MorGan, Assistant Professor of Greek and Latin,
in Harvard University. 12mo. Cloth. Mailing price, $1.35 ; for intro-
duction, $1.25. Also bound with Goodwin and White’s Anabasis: By
mail, $1.65; for introduction, $1.50.

 

f]\HIS is not a compilation from other vocabularies, but is made
on the basis of a new collection and examination of all the
words in the Anabasis itself. It contains all words found in any
of the principal editions now in use, both here and in Germany,
with every meaning which each word has in the Anabasis, and
with full references to the passages in which they occur. Latin
equivalents for Greek words and phrases are frequently given, to
aid in the comparative study of the two languages. The construc-
tions found with each word are indicated, as well as the quantity
of every long vowel, whether in Greek or Latin. Special attention
has been paid, in treating of etymology, to the connection of the
Greek words with related words in Latin and English. The facts
are brought out in one hundred and twenty-four groups of such
words, arranged conveniently for study at the end of the book.
The articles on geography, biography, and especially on public and
private antiquities, are fuller than is usual in such a work, and are
illustrated with seventy-nine cuts taken from the antique.

D. W. Abercrombie, Prin. Wor-
cester Academy, Worcester, Mass.:
The vocabulary is altogether the very
best I have ever seen, and leaves
nothing to be desired. The discus-
sion under each word is remarkably
full and valuable ; especially notice-
able are the proper names and the
words on which the illustrations are
based. The grouping of related
words is also very helpful and gives
evidence of accurate and _ recent
scholarship. Altogether this edition
must prove to be of the greatest
helpfulness to the work in Greek in
preparatory schools.

Luther Atwood, Teacher of Greek,

Digitized by
INTERNET ARCHIVE

 

Classical High School, Lynn, Mass.:
The vocabulary is certainly a gem of
the first water. As I opened the
book, the first word which attracted
my attention was μνᾷ and with it I
found, concisely stated, all of the
facts which it once took me about
three hours to collect from some half
dozen volumes in the Harvard Uni-
versity library.... The vocabu-
lary will enable the student to
dispense, so far as the study of the
Anabasis is concerned, with the host
of expensive reference books. The
introduction of the Greek roots and
the Latin equivalents, and the Latin
and English cognate words is a most
valuable help to the scholar.

Original from

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
