58 GREEK TEXT-BOOKS.

Seymour's School Iliad.

With Introduction, Commentary, and Illustrated Vocabulary, by THomas
D. SEymour, Professor of Greek in Yale College.
Books I.-III. Square 12mo. Hali-leather. 371 pages.
$1.55; for introduction, $1.25; allowance, 30 cents.
Books I.-VI. 478 pages. Mailing price, $1.75; for introduction, $1.60;
allowance, 40 cents.
[HIS is believed to be without exception the ideal Iliad for school
use. The introduction, which contains forty-five pages, pre-
sents, in a concise but systematic form, the most important facts
regarding Homeric life, the Homeric poem, Homeric style, syntax,
dialect, and verse. The text is printed in the large and clear type
that has distinguished the College Series of Greek Authors. The
commentary has been adapted to the wants of beginners in Homer.
The notes are copious for the first three books. They are less copi-
ous for Books IV. to VI., but the commentary on Book VI. is
fuller than that on Books IV. and V. One finds numberless evi-
dences that the editor did his work not only in a careful and in a
painstaking and scholarly way, but with personal pleasure and with
sympathetic regard for the difficulties of beginners. The vocabu-
lary described below contains more than twenty wood-cuts, most

 

Mailing price,

of which are new in this country.

A. H. Buck, Prof. of Greek, Boston
Univ. : In this book both editor and
publisher seem to me to have done
their best to furnish a positive and
valuable help to an easy and ade-
quate preparation for college work
in Greek poetry, and thus to have
made a notable contribution to the
cause of classical learning.

Angie Clara Chapin, Prof. of
Greek, Wellesley Coll.: It seems to
me particularly rich in what may be
called literary apparatus. With such
a guide a teacher will have no excuse
for teaching the Iliad as merely ‘‘a
queer kind of prose,’’ as Professor
Seymour says. (Dec. 16, 1889.)

William Goodell Frost, Prof. of
Greek Language and Literature,

Digitized by
INTERNET ARCHIVE

 

Oberlin, Coll.: The Introduction is
admirable for its selection of mate-
rial, and sound in the views ex-
pressed. Of course the Vocabulary
is a feature which appeals at once to
every student of Homer. I observe
at random through both Vocabulary
and notes numerous felicities which
reveal conscientious and loving care
I can hardly see how the volume as
a whole could be improved.

Charles Forster Smith, Prof. 0)
Greek, Vanderbilt Univ., Nashville,
Tenn.: I do not doubt that it will be
universally conceded to be the best
school edition of any part of the Iliad
that has yet been put on the Ameri-
can market. Ishall reeommend Pro-
fessor Seymour’s Iliad to all the
schools that fit boys for us.

Original from
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
