60 GREEK TEXT-BOOKS.

Syntax of the Moods and Tenses of the Greek
Verb.

Rewritten and Enlarged. By Win~1am Watson Goopwin, LL.D., Eliot

Professor of Greek Literature in Harvard University. 8vo. Cloth.

xxxii + 464 pages. Mailing Price, $2.15 ; Introduction Price, $2.00.

ERHAPS no other work of scholarship has enjoyed the unique

and unchallenged preéminence of Professor Goodwin’s Syntax
of the Moods and Tenses of the Greek Verb. Published both in
England and in America, it has long been the standard for the
English-speaking students of two continents.

It is only necessary to say of the new edition that it is a
most careful revision and a judicious enlargement of the pre-
vious one. Full use has been made of all contributions, Ameri-
can and foreign, to the discussion of the subjects here treated,
as well as of the author’s own further investigations and maturer
judgments.

The work is presented as something indispensable to all stu-
dents and teachers of Greek.

A copy of the Table of Contents, which contains twenty-two pages,
will be sent to any teacher who desires to see the scope of the work.

The Classical Review, London, | tions which it has undergone, there
Eng.: It is no slight proof of the} has been nothing of importance to

value of Mr. Goodwin’s work that, | correct or withdraw.
with all the additions and amplifica-

Selections from Xenophon and Herodotus.

With Notes adapted to the revised edition of Goodwin’s Greek Grammar,
and copperplate maps. Edited by W. W. Goopwin, Ph.D., LL.D., Eliot
Professor of Greek Literature, and JoHN WILLIAMS WHITE, Ph.D.,
Professor of Greek in Harvard College. 12mo. Half-morocco. vii+397
pages. Mailing Price, $1.65; for introduction, $1.50.

Greek Inflection.

By B. F. HarprnG, Head Master of the Belmont School, Belmont, Mass.
12mo. Cloth. 54 pages. Mailing price, 55 cts.; for introduction, 50 cts.
[DESIGNED to economize time for the teacher, by furnishing a
large number of words for ready use, as paradigms, in the
class-room, and at the same time to suggest a systematic and sci-
entific treatment of the noun and verb.

 

Digitized by Original from
INTERNET ARCHIVE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
