16 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

of Cunaxa,' a scout came riding up at full gallop, crying out in
Greek and in Persian that the king was near at hand with a
great army all equipped for battle. In confusion and haste
they armed themselves and drew up in fighting array. The
Greek contingent, commanded by Clearchus, held the right
wing, next the Euphrates; Cyrus with a bodyguard of 600
mounted Persians was at the center, and Ariaeus in command
of the native infantry was stationed on the left. According
to all ancient authorities the king’s army was several times as
large as his brother’s, his numbers being variously stated from
400,000 to go0,000. His line was so long that the center was
beyond the extreme left of Cyrus.

14. In spite of the king’s superiority in numbcrs, the little
army of Greeks might have won the battle for Cyrus, had it not
been for the failure of Clearchus to obey Cyrus’s command and
for the inexcusable rashness of Cyrus himself. In accordance
with the rule of Greek tactics not to expose the right, or un-
shielded, side to the enemy, Clearchus had drawn up his troops
with the right flank protected by the river (see plan, p. go).
When Cyrus directed him to lead the Greek army against the
enemy’s center, — because there the king was stationed, and if
he were routed or killed, the victory was secure, — Clearchus
felt afraid that in case he moved away from the river he might
be attacked on flank and rear; accordingly he disobeyed orders
and charged the left wing, which was opposite him. To this
mistake he immediately added another; for when the king’s
left speedily took to flight, he foolishly pursued, thus withdraw-
ing the best part of Cyrus’s army from the conflict, while he
left the king’s center and right free to surround Cyrus’s native
force.

15. Seeing the success of his Greek division, Cyrus was more
confident than ever of victory, and the men round him began to

1 Plutarch (Life of Artaxerxes, 8) is the only ancient writer who gives the
name of this village.

Google

—— <i
