THE TEN THOUSAND GREEKS 19

with considerable reluctance the Greeks allowed four generals
and twenty captains to accompany Clearchus to the tent of Tis-
saphernes, some three miles away — the Greek army having
regularly during the march encamped that distance in the rear
of the Persians. About 200 unarmed privates went along with
them as an escort.

19. When they reached the appointed place, the five gen-
erals were invited into the tent of Tissaphernes, while the cap-
tains remained outside. In a few moments, at a given signal,
the generals were seized and bound, to be taken away to the
king, and the Greeks outside were fallen upon and killed.
Xenophon mentions only a single survivor, who returned des-
perately wounded to the Greek camp to tell what had happened.

20. Tissaphernes appears to have believed that under the
shock of such a calamity the Greek army would readily sur-
render. If he had attacked them with his whole force before
they had recovered from their first feelings of dismay and terror,
it seems probable that he might have overpowered them, but his
demand for the surrender of all their arms, on the ground that
whatever had belonged to Cyrus must now belong to the king,
was met with defiance. Nevertheless, they did not fail to realize
their appalling situation, as is clear from Xenophon’s touching
description at the beginning of the third book of the Anadasis.

21. The man who, more than all others, was to rescue them
from their danger and lead them back to Greek lands, with but
comparatively light losses, was Xenophon. Having joined the
expedition merely as a friend of Proxenus, without any position
in the army, even as a private soldier, he showed himself at this
crisis more worthy of being a general than the generals them-
selves. Awaking in the night from a dream which he took to
be of good omen, he called the officers together, and by his
earnestness, eloquence, and tact filled them with new hope.
Five generals were chosen, of whom Xenophon was one, to take
the places of those who had been seized. At dawn the whole
army was assembled for the purpose of ratifying the action of

Google
