THE TEN THOUSAND GREEKS 21

continuing their journey by water, part by land; but at Calpe
they were reunited, the narrow escape of one division from
annihilation showing them the necessity of union. At Byzan-
tium, having been grossly deceived by the Spartan admiral
in command there, they forced an entrance into the city, and
would doubtless have given it over to pillage had not Xeno-
phon’s persuasive oratory demonstrated to them the utter folly
of incurring the enmity of Sparta, which was then supreme
in the Greek world. Outrageously treated a little later by the
Spartan harmost or governor of Byzantium, they were glad to
enter the service of Seuthes, king of Thrace; but although he
was firmly established in his kingdom by their assistance,
he failed to carry out his promises of generous pay and rewards.
Fortunately, just at this time (spring of 399 B.c.), Sparta was
beginning a campaign in aid of the Greek cities of western
Asia Minor against the designs of Persia. Thibron, who was
in command of this campaign, needing troops, took the
remainder of the Cyreans, about 6000 in number, into his pay.
Xenophon led them to Pergamus, and there delivered them to
their new commander, under whom they were united with other
Greeks, and ceased to exist as a separate body.

24. Although the death of Cyrus was a misfortune for the
Greeks who had accompanied him, for Greece as a nation it
was doubtless an advantage. With his energy, talent for
organization, understanding of the Greeks, and ability to attach
great numbers of them to himself, he would probably have been
able to reduce the whole country to dependence on Persia, and
thus to avenge the defeats suffered by his ancestors nearly a
century before when the immense armies of Darius and Xerxes
invaded Greece.

Lessons of the Retreat

25. The expedition was a failure in its immediate purpose —
namely, to win the throne for Cyrus and secure ample fortunes
for the Greeks who participated in the venture. Still the fact

Google
