LIFE OF XENOPHON 25

advised him first to consult the oracle of Apollo at Delphi. But
the self-reliant young man made up his mind for himself, and,
instead of asking the oracle whether he should go or not, in-
quired to what gods he ought to sacrifice in order to be most
successful in his undertaking. At the outset he had no idea of
Cyrus’s treasonable plans against his brother (§§ 5, 6), but the
opportunity for a few years of travel and adventure, combined
with the probability, which was held out to him by Proxenus,
of gaining a handsome fortune, appealed irresistibly to his
active, practical mind.

31. Until several of the Greek officers, including Proxenus,
were entrapped by Tissaphernes at the Zapatas (§§ 18, 19),
Xenophon played no important réle in the army. That he was
able in a single night (§ 21), in spite of his youthfulness and his
comparatively slight experience in war, to become the acknowl-
edged leader of the retreat, over the heads of older men who
were soldiers by profession, speaks well not only for his native
ability, but also for the value of the Athenian education and
training. Although he was distrusted at times, and some of his
Boeotian and Peloponnesian comrades, jealous at an Athenian’s
success, intrigued against him, his eloquence, good judgment,
ready wit, and quick insight always triumphed (§§ 22, 23). He
won the affection of his men by his care for their comfort and
his willingness always to share in their toils and hardships.
Certain modifications in the tactics of Greek armies arose from
the experiences of the Ten Thousand, and it is likely that some
of the maneuvers of the retreat were suggested by Xenophon.

32. In March, 399 B.c., he turned the remnant of the army
over to Thibron (§ 23). Whether he himself remained with it
or returned to Greece, is not known. Itis probable that about
this time he was banished from Athens for his participation in
the expedition of Cyrus. Thus the fears of Socrates (§ 30) were
shown to have been well grounded ; indeed, Xenophon says in
one of his works, written several years later, that those who
failed to heed the advice of Socrates lived to repent of their

Google
