26 . XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

folly. That this action of his fellow citizens caused him great
sorrow is clear from his remark that exile is one of life’s hard-
est misfortunes.

33. By the end of the year 399 B.c., at any rate, he appears
to have been with the army of Thibron, and perhaps he had not
left it. He served under Thibron’s successors, Dercylidas and
Agesilaus (§ 25), accompanying the latter to Greece in 394 B.C.,
and being present with him at the battle of Coronea, in which
his own country, with other Greek states, was pitted against
Sparta. Whether he actually took part in the battle or not,
the fact that he was an exile seems, in the eyes of the ancients,
to have freed him from all blame for participation in a war
against his country. He himself betrays no sting of conscience,
and no word of criticism of his conduct is found in any other
writer.

34. After the battle of Coronea he went with Agesilaus to
Sparta, where he was probably joined a little later by his wife,
Philesia, whom he had married in Asia, and their two sons,
Gryllus and Diodorus. These boys were brought hither, at the
suggestion of Agesilaus, to be reared under the Spartan system
of education. Although Xenophon owed to his Athenian train-
ing many of the qualities which had enabled him to acquire and
maintain his influence over the Ten Thousand, he had a strong
belief in the efficacy of the stricter Spartan methods, and wished
his sons to have the benefit of them.

35. In a few years, probably about 387 B.c., he was sent as a
colonist to Scillus, near Olympia, in Elis. The Spartans gave
him a house and land, and near his home he bought an estate
on which he built a temple to Artemis, and celebrated an
annual festival in her honor. Here he lived for many years as
a well-to-do country squire, having leisure for writing, entertain-
ing his friends, and hunting. That he was happy in his home
may be inferred from the ideal pictures of married life which
he sketches in his writings. . He was not altogether out of
touch with the world, either, since once in four years the fes-

Google

i APO gg

ee se, se, ep op EE, r,t, _ ED, _ a, eh, gine, gE, | See, eee ee, | ee em, , eee gee
