LIFE OF XENOPHON 27

tival of Zeus brought together at Olympia throngs of men, rep.
resenting every calling, from all parts of Greece and the
colonies. Literary men— orators, historians, poets — took ad-
vantage of these great gatherings to recite their works, and
artists exhibited their masterpieces. Many such men, with
politicians and statesmen, may have been entertained by Xeno-
phon at his home, which was only two or three miles away. We
may be sure that he had his horses and dogs, to the training of
which he devoted no little attention. The earliest important
works we possess on the subjects of hunting and horsemanship
are by his hand. |

36. Not long after the battle of Leuctra (371 B.c.), in which
Sparta lost her position as the supreme state in Greece, the
Eleans drove out of their country the unwelcome colonists whom
Sparta had imposed upon them. Xenophon and his family,
being obliged to leave their pleasant home at Scillus, removed
to Corinth.

In 369 B.c. Athens became allied with Sparta against the
dominant power of Thebes, and about this time the decree of
banishment against Xenophon was revoked. There is no evi-
dence that he returned to Athens to live, although he may have
‘gone there at different times to get material for use in his
writings. That he cherished no bitterness against his country
is seen by his permitting his sons to fight in the Athenian cavalry.
In a skirmish preceding the battle of Mantinea (362 B.c.) Gryllus
was Slain. Diogenes Laertius says that Xenophon was sacrific-
ing, with a garland on his head, when the news was brought to
him of his son’s death. Thereupon he took off the garland; but
being told that he fell nobly, he replaced it, and merely said, with-
out shedding a tear, “‘I knew that my son was mortal.”

Xenophon probably died at Corinth about 354 B.c. The lat-
est date referred to in his works, if we assume the treatise On
the Revenues to be genuine, —and it is thoroughly in his style,
— iS 355 B.C.

37. Among Xenophon’s most prominent characteristics was

Google
