28 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

his piety, in which he heartily assented to the orthodox beliefs
and practices of his time. He would not undertake any matter
of importance until the will of the gods had been ascertained
through omens obtained by sacrifice. At the time when he was
offered the sole command of the Ten Thousand (§ 23), he appre-
ciated the honor, and would have liked to accept the office, but
since the gods vouchsafed only unfavorable omens in answer
to his inquiries as to what course he should adopt, he felt it
necessary to decline. While he believed in oracles, dreams,
and signs like sneezing, he also emphasized the value of prayer,
and he had faith in the goodness of the gods and in the
immortality of the soul.

38. He was something of a hero worshiper in his attitude
toward Socrates, Cyrus, and Agesilaus. These men of genius
had great influence over him, and in his admiration for their
good qualities he was blinded to their faults.

His affection for his wife is probably reflected in the beauti-
ful womanly characters he portrays in the Occonomicus and the
Cyropaedia ; and the charming, lifelike description of the boy
Cyrus in the latter work may well have been drawn from the
lives of his own sons. The warmth of his friendship is illus-
trated by his loyalty to his friend Proxenus,

Xenophon’s sense of humor is seen often in the Anadbasis, for
instance, in the third book, when, in order to minimize the dis-
advantage of a lack of cavalry, he exaggerates the dangers to
which horsemen are exposed, and again in the picture he gives,
at the end of the fourth book, of races on the slope of a hill so
steep that many of the horses, riders and all, rolled over and
over going down, but had hard work to get back at a slow walk.

Although he was for a number of years a follower and hearer
of Socrates, he did not have a philosophical mind, and the wise
man’s teachings appealed to him only as they could be applied
to everyday living. In all the occupations of life he demanded
adequate knowledge, believing that knowledge led to virtue, and
that virtue alone made a life worth living. He had the Greek

Google

— eee, ep . > “eee, eee, _ S_,_ ey, |e, ee, Pee... RE, _ Ae, ee Eee . .. 2 m,,_ e eee  ee, eeeye Ss) i OO ee
