30 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

other writer of that time mentions him in connection with the
expedition, and we should never have heard of him but for his
own writings. Although he cannot be called an author of
the highest rank, he was the first versatile Greek writer, includ-
ing in his works history, travels, biography, memoirs, practical
philosophy, romance, theories of government and of household
management, military tactics, and handbooks on horsemanship,
cavalry maneuvers, and hunting.

42, The Anadasis, in seven books, shows Xenophon at his
best, narrating details of which he was a witness, and for which
he must have made copious notes on the march. Only the first
book describes the anabasis proper,—the “march up” to
Babylon, —the remaining books being devoted to the retreat,
and the adventures of the Greeks until they joined Thibron
(§ 23). Sophaenetus, one of the Greek generals with Cyrus,
and a Syracusan, Themistogenes, who is mentioned as the his-
torian of the expedition at the beginning of the third book of
Xenophon’s e//enica, also wrote about the adventures of the
Ten Thousand, but their works are not preserved, having doubt-
less been superseded by Xenophon’s superior account.’

The Axabasis was probably not published till after Xenophon
left Scillus (§ 36). If, as some have held, the work was written
‘to justify Xenophon for his conduct in joining Cyrus, the enemy
of his country, the purpose was certainly well concealed. It
is more likely that we can take the book for what it purports
to be —a plain, unvarnished tale of a remarkable episode in
Greek soldiering, which gave the world a new idea of Persian
impotency.?

1It has been thought by some that Themistogenes was a fictitious name
under which Xenophon published his Axzadbasis, and by others that Themi-
stogenes, not Xenophon, was the author of the work, but the style is clearly
Xenophon’s, and the reference to Themistogenes in the //e//enica (3. 1. 2) can
be most easily explained on the assumption that Xenophon’s Anadasts had
not then been published.

2 Xenophon’s other works may be briefly described:

The //eVenica is the only trustworthy and clear account we have of Greek

Google
