LIFE OF XENOPHON 31

43. Xenophon was not trained for a literary career, and his
style shows great unevenness ; for, while his practical nature
led him to tell what he had to say with perfect simplicity and
clearness, he was under the influence, to some extent, especially

affairs from 411 to 362 B.c. The first two books were probably published
before Xenophon left Athens to join Cyrus, and were intended as a continua-
tion of Thucydides’s history of the Peloponnesian War; but the work was not
completed until the last years of his life.

The Cyropaedia, written in his old age, sets forth Xenophon’s ideas of a
perfect government. Cyrus the Great, king of Persia 558-529 B.c., is the
hero, but Xenophon makes no pretense of confining his story to actual his-
tory. Most of the details in the organization of his model state were bor-
rowed from Sparta, and many of the characteristics of the hero were suggested
by the best traits of Xenophon’s friends, Cyrus the Younger and Agesilaus.
As a political and moral romance the Cyropaedia has been likened to
Fénelon’s 7élémague, and the noble, manly, but impossibly good characters
of Cyrus and some of his officers have suggested a comparison with the tales
of King Arthur and his Round Table. Mixed with much that is dry and
uninteresting are many delightful episodes, among them the earliest love
story in European literature.

The Memorabilia gives us the best idea we have of Socrates the man as
distinct from the philosopher. It was probably written not long after Xeno-
phon’s return to Greece with Agesilaus (§ 33), and its purpose was to show,
by drawing a true picture of Socrates’s life and beliefs, the injustice of the
charges under which he had been condemned to death in 399 B.c. Socrates’s
deeper philosophical doctrines were beyond the comprehension of Xenophon,
but his practical teachings are here presented in a series of actual conversa-
tions between himself and his friends, some of which Xenophon had heard
and others of which he reports at second hand. The well-known allegory on
the choice of Hercules between a life of ease and pleasure on the one hand,
and a life of virtue and usefulness on the other, occurs in the first chapter of
the second book.

The conception which we gain of Socrates from the Afemorabilia is supple-
mented by the Oeconomicus and the Symposium. The former shows Socrates’s
interest in practical agriculture and household management, although many
of the.views expressed are doubtless Xenophon’s own, as it is hardly likely
that Socrates was intimately acquainted with country life. It gives the best
picture in Greek literature of the relations between husband and wife.
Socrates is told by his friend Ischomachus how he had trained his young wife
to be a worthy helpmate, persuading her to leave off high-heeled boots and

Google
