32 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

in his later years, of Isocrates and his rhetorical school, and
he lacked the literary training or sagacity which would have
enabled him to avoid an inartistic mingling of the two styles.

paint, to take good care of the slaves when they were sick, etc., until she at
last became his own wisest judge and critic. The Symposium portrays Soc-
rates on the lighter side, as a guest at a banquet, where he discourses on love
and beauty. It gives a good notion of the frivolous talk and entertainments
indulged in on such occasions at Athens.

The Agesilaus is a panegyric on Xenophon’s friend, the Spartan king.

The Aero represents the tyrant Hiero of Syracuse setting forth the dangers
of absolute power, and the poet Simonides advising him how to rule justly
and so as to win the affection and devotion of his people.

The Constitution of Sparta is not so much an account of the Spartan
government of Xenophon’s day as an encomium on the institutions of
Lycurgus, many of which had passed away.

The pamphlet Ox the Revenues was probably written in 355 B.C., being
thus the latest of Xenophon’s works. It is a socialistic tract aiming to show
how the Athenian revenues’ could be sufficiently increased so that every citi-
zen, rich and poor alike, might receive daily from the state a free gift of three
obols (equivalent to nine cents, but with a purchasing power several times
greater), a sum which would relieve the poor and return to the rich good
interest on their taxes. Such an impractical and dangerous proposition is
surprising, coming from Xenophon, who had no sympathy with demagogues,
The book contains a valuable description of the silver mines of Laurium in
southern Attica. The view is expressed that the value of silver is unchang-
ing, even as compared with gold. This tract shows that Xenophon in his
later years had given up his earlier prejudices against Athens.

We have also three technical treatises by Xenophon. One, On Hunting,
deals with the breeding and training of dogs, the hunting of hares, boars,
and other game, the use of hunting nets, etc. In this, as in all his works,
Xenophon’s piety shines out ; he advises opening the hunt with prayer to
Apollo and Artemis. The Cavalry General was written in the desire to im-
prove Athenian cavalry operations. The third treatise, On Horsemanship,
gives instruction in buying and training horses, showing incidentally that the
risky nature of a horse trade is no new thing. All these technical works
are of interest chiefly to the antiquarian, although they were of practical
value when written.

Of two other works which have come down to us under Xenophon’s name,
one, the Constitution of Athens, is certainly not by him, and the other, the
Apology of Socrates, is not considered genuine by most scholars.

Google

“eco =

TT,

hb

\o
