LIFE OF XENOPHON 33

Nevertheless, he is, as Dakyns says,! “ a sweet-tongued talker,
a wise man and a good, whose style reminds us of the Vicar of
Wakefield.”

His language is Attic, but he admitted many Ionic, Doric,
and poetical words, also words taken from the dialect of the
people; and in grammatical constructions he frequently de-
parted from the best Attic usage. Every one of his works con-
tains many words not found elsewhere in his writings or in any
other Attic author. These departures from pure Attic cannot
be wondered at when we remember that he left Athens at the
age of about thirty, and was associated henceforth with men
from other parts of Greece.

In spite of these faults his works were popular, and exerted a
great influence on the development of Attic known as the Com-
mon Dialect, which was spoken and written by educated persons
in Greece and elsewhere from about the time of Alexander.

44. The Romans were specially fond of Xenophon, as they
could read him easily, and his subjects were of interest to them.
We learn from Cicero? that Scipio Africanus the Younger
always had a copy of Xenophon’s Cyropaedia by him. Mark
Antony was familiar with the Avzadbasis. When his army was in
distress during his Parthian campaign, he was heard to exclaim
repeatedly, ‘‘O the Ten Thousand!” apparently admiring the
success of their retreat, although they had a longer distance to
travel and a more powerful enemy to contend with.’

Cicero cannot say too much in Xenophon’s praise. As a
young man he translated the Oeconomicus,* and in his De Senec-
tute ® he gives a free rendering of a passage in the Cyropaedia®
on the immortality of the soul. The discourse of Xenophon, he
says,’ is sweeter than honey, and the Muses spoke with his
voice. Quintilian, one of the best of Roman critics, mentions ®

1 The Works of Xenophon, translated, I. cxlvi.

2 Tusculanae Disputationes, 2.62; Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem, 1.1. 23.

8 Plutarch, Life of Antony, 45. 4 De Offictis, 2. 87.

§ 79-81. 68. 7, 17-22. * Orator, 32 and 62. 8 10. 1. 82.
- ANABASIS — 3

Google
