34 XENOPHON'S ANABASIS

the unaffected charm of his style, as if his speech had been
molded by the Graces.

Caesar, in his Galiic and Civil Wars, writes in a simple, con-
versational style, clear and elegant, which may have been influ-
enced to some extent by Xenophon. His Roman predecessor
in the writing of personal memoirs was Quintus Lutatius
Catulus, whose book, as we learn from Cicero,' was composed
in an easy, Xenophontean style. | .

45. Greek writers, too, in the Roman period, were admirers
of Xenophon. Dionysius of Halicarnassus,? who ranks high
among Greek literary critics, accords to him, to be sure, faint
praise in comparison with Herodotus; but Dio Chrysostom 3
says that he is sometimes moved to tears by Xenophon’s words
of exhortation, and he advises students of oratory to study his
writings. Polybius* speaks of the retreat of the Ten Thousand
under Xenophon as one of the causes leading to Alexander’s
campaign in Asia, and Eunapius, a historian and biographer of
about 400 a.D., declares that Alexander the Great would not
have become great but for Xenophon.

Plutarch, in several of the Zzves, refers to Xenophon as one
of his sources of information. Arrian, who lived in the second
century after Christ, took Xenophon as his model both in his
life and in the variety and character of his writings, so that he
was even called ‘“‘ the younger Xenophon.” One of his works
was the Axnabasis of Alexander. Xenophon of Ephesus, of the
third century a.D., wrote a romance, Zphesiaca (Ephesian Ad-
ventures), of the love of Habrocomes and Arfthea, which in one
or two features reminds us of the story of Romeo and Juliet.
He imitates, to some extent, the style of Xenophon the Athe-
nian, and the names of the lovers appear to be a reminiscence
of Xenophon’s tale, in the Cyzopaedia, of Abradatas and Pan-

1 Brutus, 132.

2 De Compositione Verborum (On the Arrangement of Words), 10;
Epistula ad Cn. Pompetum (perhaps a freedman of Pompey the Great), 4.

3 Orationes, 18. 43.6. 9f.

Google

wr Ne 7

as
