LIFE. OF XENOPHON 35

thea, the first love story in Greek literature. Numerous other
writers of antiquity make mention of Xenophon, and some were
undoubtedly influenced by his style.

46. By about 400 a.D. Greek learning had largely died out
west of the Adriatic, and was not revived until near the close of
the fourteenth century, when a Greek, Manuel Chrysoloras,
became professor of Greek at the University of Florence. In
the fifteenth century some parts of Xenophon were translated
by Italians. The Occonomicus was specially popular. Upon it
Leon Battista Alberti modeled the third book of his Zreatise on
the Management of the Family, and he expressly states that he
has sought to reproduce the simplicity and purity of Xenophon’s
style. Matteo Palmieri in his Vita Civile also drew not a little
from the same source.

The earliest printed edition of any work of Xenophon was pub-
lished in Latin, at Milan, in 1467. The Ae//enica was the first
of Xenophon’s works to be printed in Greek, being published
by the famous house of Aldus, at Venice, in 1503. The oldest
manuscripts we have were not written before the twelfth century.

47. The Englishmen of Queen Elizabeth’s time were fond of
Xenophon. Sir Philip Sidney, in his Afpologie for Poetrie, ranks
Xenophon’s Cyrus with the great generals and heroes of the
world, and calls the Cyropaedia “an absolute heroicall poem,”
while Lord Bacon, who mentions Xenophon several times with
high praise in Zhe Advancement of Learning, speaks! of him as
“the young scholar” whose retreat with the Ten Thousand
through the heart of the king’s country astonished the world
and furnished the inspiration for the achievements of Alexander.

48. In our own day Xenophon has been highly praised as
a military expert. Colonel Theodore A. Dodge says in his
Alexander® that “the soldier of greatest use to us preceding
Alexander was unquestionably Xenophon,” and he calls him ®
“the father of the system of retreat, the originator of all that

11, 7. 30. 2p, IOI. 8 p. 105.

Google
