38 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

gaining boundless wealth from plunder. The munificent liber-
ality of Cyrus toward Lysander in the last years .of the
Peloponnesian War (§ 7) had given him great prestige among
the Greeks, and it was easy for him after the war was over, by
keeping his real purpose concealed, to raise as strong a Greek
force as he needed ($§ 4, 6).

54, COLLECTING THE ARMy.— His army was collected for him
by a few friends, like Clearchus, Proxenus, and others, to whom
he supplied large sums of money. These men were the generals
(arparyyoi) of the mercenary force, each commanding with the
assistance of a lieutenant general (troorpariyos) the troops he
had enrolled. Accordingly the number of men in the divisions
(rages) varied, but all divisions were organized in the same way.
Naturally most of the men came from states friendly to Sparta,
the great majority being Peloponnesians; the Spartan govern-
ment itself sent 700 men under Chirisophus (§ 7). There were
also many Thessalians, Rhodians, Cretans, and Thracians, with
a few Boeotians, Athenians, and others.

55. Pay.— Cyrus paid the Greek private at the outset a daric
a month (about $3.60, but with a purchasing power several
times as great), but this was increased at Tarsus (§ 10) toa
daric and a half. The captain received twice, the general four
times,as much. Lavish promises were made, too, of additional
pay and rewards in case the expedition were successful, all of
which were of course rendered futile by the death of Cyrus ‘at
Cunaxa. Probably many of the soldiers added substantially to
their gains by selling from time to time to the sutlers who con-
ducted the market supplied by the Persians (§ 60) part or all
of their share of the plunder taken from the country through
which they traveled.

56. ORGANIZATION OF THE HEAvy-ARMED Troops. — Each divi-
sion (ragis)' of heavy infantry (érAtrac) was organized by com-

1 Tdés, like English vision, varies in meaning, being used for a body of

troops, of undefined size. The commander of a rdéis was called ratlapxos; in
p. 147, 1. 21, the lieutenant generals (§ 54) appear to be designated by this title.

Google
