THE ARMY OF CYRUS 39

panies (Adyor) of normally 100 men (ninety-six privates and four
lieutenants), each commanded by a captain (Aoxayos). The
captains were probably appointed by their own generals, and in
many cases had doubtless assisted in raising the quota of their
divisions. ‘The company was divided into two platoons of fifty
men (evrnxoorves), each under the command of a first lieutenant
(wevrynxovtyp) ; and each platoon was again divided into two
squads of twenty-five men (€vwporia). Of the four enomoties
thus formed in each company, two were probably commanded
by the penteconters, and the other two by second lieutenants or
enomotarchs (évwpdrapxor).

57. ORGANIZATION OF THE LiGHT INFANTRY AND THE CAVALRY.
— The light infantry (yvpvjres) comprised peltasts or targeteers
(weXraorai), archers (roférat), javelin throwers (dxovrurad ), and
slingers (odevdovyra). The targeteers were the most important
of the light troops, and their name was frequently used as
synonymous with yupvyres. There were no slingers in the Greek
army until they crossed the Zapatas on the retreat, when a divi-
sion of about 200 Rhodians was organized to compete with the
slingers of the enemy (p. 163, 1.9 f.). The organization of the
light-armed forces appears to have been less complete than that
of the hoplites, their divisions being designated only by the
indefinite word rages, and their commanders being called ra&cap-
xot (p. 183, 1. 20). They were usually stationed on the wings in
battle, and on the march were assigned to any post where they
could best protect the main body.

The only cavalry (iamets) with the Greeks on the march inland
was a troop of forty Thracians, who deserted to the king after
the battle; but fifty cavalrymen were equipped on the retreat at
the time the slingers were organized. They were commanded
by a cavalry captain or hipparch (iamapyos).

58. EQUIPMENT OF THE HEAvy-ARMED Troops. — The hoplite,
when fully equipped, carried about seventy to seventy-five
pounds of armor. His greaves (xvquides) and helmet (xpdvos)
were of bronze; he wore also a leather cuirass (@wpag), reén-

Google
