42 _  XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

The cavalry, being organized in an emergency (§ 57), were
partly equipped with corselets (@wpaxes), partly with leather
jerkins (o7oAddes); they doubtless wore helmets, perhaps also
greaves and thigh pieces, and were probably supplied with
swords, and with light spears for hurling or thrusting. Their
horses were not protected.

60. THe Suppiies.— As was the custom in mercenary armies, -
these Greek soldiers provided their own equipment. The daily
supply of provisions (r& émir7Se) had to be bought, too, by
each man. There was nothing like the modern system of ra-
tions. As long as they were under the protection of Cyrus, or
of Tissaphernes at the beginning of the retreat, a market was
maintained in the barbarian army, at which they could make
their purchases. Supplies consisted chiefly of grain and wine,
and were bought by the sutlers from the inhabitants of the
country through which they passed. At some cities on their
route enterprising tradesmen themselves set up a market, com-
peting with the army sutlers. At times plundering was allowed, ©
and after Tissaphernes proved treacherous at the Zapatas (§§ 18,
Ig) it became the regular. means of subsistence, the booty and
prisoners being held as common property.

61. THE BaGcGaGE TRAIN AND NON-COMBATANTS. — The
tents, cooking utensils, booty, personal baggage, and at times
part of the arms of the soldiers, were carried on wagons and
beasts of burden (imofvyu), For an army of over 10,000
men the baggage train would necessarily be cumbersome,
and early on the retreat wagons, tents, and all superfluous
articles were burned. Their march continued to be badly
hampered, however, by the pack animals and the great number
of non-combatants (é6yAos), including drivers of the baggage
animals, servants of many of the officers and soldiers, women,
captives, the sick or disabled, etc. Upon entering the moun-
tains of the Carduchians some relief was obtained by dis-
carding all the animals that could be spared and setting
free the recently captured prisoners, but even after that,

Google
