THE ARMY OF CYRUS 43

such routes had to be selected as were passable for the bag-
gage train.

62. THE ORDER OF MaRCH.— The relative position, on the
march, of heavy infantry, light troops, and baggage, was not
fixed, but varied according to circumstances. On the retreat
Chirisophus commanded the van, Xenophon and Timasion the
rear, but within each division the companies took turns in hold-
ing for a day at a time the head of the column, a position of
high honor and responsibility for both the company and its
captain.

The usual order of march was in column (xara xépas), with
the companies of each division and the enomoties of each com-
pany marching one behind another. This gave a narrow front,
varying in width according to circumstances. The generals
rode at the head of their divisions, while the captains and
subordinate officers marched with their commands. Detach-
ments of light troops were sent ahead as scouts, and others were
posted on the flanks and rear to engage in skirmishing with the
enemy, or to protect the heavy infantry and baggage from
attack.

Orders were passed along from officer to officer, or even
from soldier to soldier (see mapayyéAAw, tapeyyvaw in the Vo-
cabulary). If at any time it became necessary for the column to
form in line of battle, the leading enomoty halted, the second
marched to the left into position beside it, the third to the left
of the second, and so on, until a line of sufficient length had
been formed. Occasionally, if an attack seemed imminent, the
army pursued its march drawn up in line of battle.

63. A formation which was found useful in open country,
when there was danger of attack from every side, was the hol-
low square (zrAaiovov, see plan, p. 168), which could instantly
present a front to the enemy in any direction. It was composed
of the heavy infantry, the best men being on the outside, so as
to be the first to engage with the enemy. ‘The baggage and
non-combatants were inside the square, and the light-armed

Google
