44 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

troops were stationed either within or without, wherever they
could render the best service.

64. A Day’s Marcu.—The march began early in the morn-
ing, and breakfast (dpeorov) was not eaten till toward eleven
o’clock, when the army halted for its midday rest. The chief
meal (detzvov) was taken after the army encamped for the night,
some time between four and seven o’clock. The average day’s
march (cra@uds) from Sardis to Cunaxa was a little over six
parasangs (see wapacdyyys in the Vocabulary), about twenty
miles. On the retreat, impeded as they were by difficult moun-
tain roads and deep snows, as well as by continual skirmishing
with the natives, their speed was considerably less.

It is clear from Xenophon’s detailed report, in Book I, of the
journey to Cunaxa that the army was on the road 182 days, 96
of which were spent in camp, resting, waiting for the arrival of
reénforcements, securing supplies, etc. It is generally assumed
that they left Sardis March 6, 4o1 B.c., arriving at Cunaxa the
day of the battle, September 3. About five months more were
spent on the march to Trapezus (§ 22).

65. THE Camp. —In camp (e7parézedov), as on the march,
Cyrus’s Greek army remained apart from the barbarians. Un-
like the Romans, the Greeks were not accustomed to fortify
their camp; consequently it was a comparatively easy matter
to get settled for the night. Of course, wherever possible,
a place was chosen which afforded water, fodder for the ani-
mals, and fuel for cooking and for the watch fires. The men,
grouped by enomoties, companies, and divisions, spent the
night in tents of hides. After burning the tents on the retreat
(§ 61), they encamped whenever possible, provided it appeared
to be safe, in villages; at other times they were without any
shelter. The arms were stacked in one place, called ra ozAa,
which appears to have been in front of the camp. Sentinels
were on guard during the night, shifting at each watch. There
were three (later four) watches, from sunset to sunrise. Camp
was usually broken early (§ 64), signals being given for pack-

Google
