THE ARMY OF CYRUS 45

ing up, placing the baggage on the pack animals, and setting
forth.

66. THE ORDER OF BATTLE. — The usual Greek formation for
a pitched battle was the phalanx (@aAayé), in which the com-
panies (Adxor) of hoplites were stationed side by side, with a
depth (from front to rear) of eight men. Occasionally a greater
or less depth was adopted, according as a longer or a more
compact line was needed. The light-armed troops and cavalry
were posted wherever they could be most effective, usually on
the wings. .

When the army had been drawn up in the desired order,
sacrifices were offered and omens taken to see if the gods
favored a battle at that time. If the auspices were unfavorable,
they were taken again; and the men were unwilling to engage
until the gods showed their favor by propitious signs. The
commander often made an address to raise the spirits and con-
fidence of the soldiers. The watchword (cvv@yyua), to distinguish
friends from foes in the battle, was given, and passed through
the ranks from man to man and back again. At the battle of
Cunaxa it was Zets Swripp cat Niky, Zeus Savior and Victory. A
war song (adv) was sung, and as it died away the advance
began. When the phalanx was at no great distance — but still
out of range—from the enemy, the trumpet (cdAmy£) sounded

1 The Greeks believed that the gods communicated with men either by
direct inspiration, as in dreams, or through signs, which were of many kinds
and needed, in order to be correctly interpreted, the services of professional
diviners or soothsayers (udvres). In war the usual method of learning
heaven’s will was by observation of the internal organs, especially liver, heart,
and lungs, of sacrificed animals (see Fig. 38, p. 107). Oxen, sheep, goats, or
pigs were commonly the victims. The color and condition of the vital organs,
the willingness or reluctance of the victim in approaching the place of sacri-
fice, the motions of the flame and smoke of the sacrificial fire, etc., were all of
significance in determining the character of the omen (74 lepd, ra opdyia).
The movements and the cries of birds were also believed to reveal the will of
the gods. A bird seen on the right, for instance, or flying from the east, was
considered a favorable sign.

Google
