46 XENOPHON’S ANABASIS

the charge, and raising the war cry (see éAeA‘Zw in the Vocabu-
lary), the whole line broke into a run, every man holding his
missile ready to discharge. If the enemy withstood the onset,
a hand-to-hand combat with swords and spears followed. If he
fled before the lines met,—as he generally did in the engage-
ments of the Ten Thousand,—a detachment was sent in
pursuit.

_ After a victory a sacrifice of thanksgiving was made, and a
trophy (rpdmatoy), consisting of arms taken from the enemy, was
set up on a post or a tree. Care was taken to give the dead the
rites of burial.

67. For attacking a height in several places at once, Xenophon
or the council of officers invented the formation of company
columns (Adxor dpOtor, see AZ, M on the plan, p. 184). The four
enomoties of each company were marshaled one behind another,
so that the company offered only a narrow front to the enemy’s
attack, while it had sufficient depth to enable it to push its way
up the hill against the enemy. The companies, each forming
thus a small column, were arranged side by side, at intervals
which might be extended or closed up at need, and into which
the enemy could not penetrate without being exposed to attack
on-all sides. For Xenophon’s account of the advantages of this
formation, see p. 221, I. 25 ff. :

68. DEMOCRATIC SPIRIT AND ORGANIZATION. — Compared
with modern standards, discipline in a Greek army was gen-
erally lax. Officers who were strict disciplinarians, like Clear-
chus, were cordially disliked by their men. The spirit of liberty
was too strong in most Greeks to admit of their being uniformly
submissive to another’s command. Cyrus found this out when
his Greek mercenaries, discovering that he had hired them
under false pretenses (see §§ 6, 10, 11), refused to accompany
him further. His only means of prevailing over them was the
promise of increased pay and generous rewards. Clearchus’s
disobedience of Cyrus’s orders in the battle of Cunaxa (§ 14)
also illustrates the Greek spirit of independence. Even Clear-

Google
