#267

ship and such greed for individual gain at a time when concerted action
was essential were quite in accord with Menon’s selfish character. —
ἐλέγετο : personal construction, as is shown by the lack of a subject for
πέμψαι. -

74,14. τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα: (the Greek contingent, except Menon’s
troops, which had already crossed (l. 6).

74,15. τῶν διαβαινόντων: partitive.

74,16. μαστῶν: translate by the singular. 

ὑπὸ τοῦ ποταμοῦ : the use of the agent construction personifies the river; otherwise the dative
of means would be used. 

74, 18. γένοιτο: had become, for ἐγένετο of direct discourse ; they hint
that it has become so for his special benefit. — 

εἰ μή: except. — 

τότε: for νῦν of direct discourse.

74, 19. πλοίοις: on his march to Greece Xerxes had built at this
point a pontoon bridge which had remained in use until Abrocémas
burned it. — 

κατέκαυσεν : see on ἐποίησε, 51, 6.

74,20. ἵνα. .. διαβῇ: the mood of A.'s actual thought is retained
after a past tense, where we might have the optative.1 English requires
might (not may) cross.—

θεῖον: predicate, a special providence, the
implied subject being the low water. A second subject of ἐδόκει is
ὑποχωρῆσαι τὸν ποταμόν, and that the river, etc. (see on δοκεῖ, 66, 10).

74) 21. Κύρῳ ὡς βασιλεύσοντι : dative of interest, in honor of Cyrus,
because he was destined to be king; ws shows that the idea expressed
by the participle was held by the river or by the god who controlled its
waters. The statement of the Thapsacenes, as reported by Xenophon,
must be regarded as a piece of Oriental flattery, since in the late autumn
and early winter the river is often fordable. It is to be remembered,
however, that the Greeks crossed between the middle and the end
of July, at a time when the river is usually at flood height. From
the end of May until towards the middle of July the waters stand
about thirteen feet above low water (<bibl n="https://archive.org/details/historyofbabylon01rogeuoft/page/274/mode/2up">Rogers, History of Babylonia
and Assyria, I, 274</bibl>). The conduct of Abrocomas, content with
burning the boats, although it is likely that when he was there the
river was already fordable, since he was not many days ahead of
Cyrus, is an indication that he, like Syennésis, was trimming between
the rival brothers.

74, 27. ἐπεσιτίσαντο: they were entering upon the Arabian desert.

HA. B. G. Gl.
1 881-anda 590,674 1365,1369 642a-and-d

