VOCABULARY

THE Vocabulary gives the meanings of all words found in the text of this edition
of the first four books of the Anabasis. Since it is not a dictionary of the whole
Anabasis, a Multiplicity of citations, which tend only to confuse the pupil, has been
avoided.

The principal parts of all verbs, except those which offer no opportunity for error, are given in full.
A hyphen prefixed to any word indicates that it is used
only in compounds, The parts of compound verbs are given only when the
simple verb is not listed in this vocabulary.

In explaining derivations, simplicity and clearness have been the aim. Many
cognate and borrowed words have been given both from English and Latin; some
of the borrowed words, however, are not borrowed directly from the Greek words
under which they are placed (cp. baptize under βάπτω), The editors have seen
in their own teaching that observation of related words not only quickens a pupil's
interest in Greek, but also aids him greatly in learning the meanings of words.
For assistance in understanding Greek, Latin, and English cognate forms, which
vary in their mutes (or stops) according to principles stated in the last century by
Jakob Grimm, the chief features of Grimm’s Law are here given. Vowel changes
follow no fixed law, and in fact there are numerous exceptions to the law of mute
changes.

error, are given in full.

GREEK LATIN ENGLISH
π (πούς) =p (pes) =f (foot)
κ (κύων) =c (canis) =h (hound)
(mr) ᾿ς (ree _ (mothe )
μήτηρ ~ mater — mother
β (τύρβη) ΞΞ ὁ (turba) =p  (thorp)
Ὕ (γένος) =g (genus) = (kin)
δ (δύο) =d (duo) =f (two)
φ (φέρω) =f (fero) =6 (bear)
χ (χόρτο) =A (hortus) =g (garden)
θ (θύρα) =f Cforis) =d (door)

All Greek words used in explaining derivations are translated, unless they are
defined in the vocabulary immediately above or below. If a word used in explain-
ing derivations is preceded by the abbreviation "cp.," the vocabulary-word is
not derived from it, but both are from the same root; for example, ἀγνοέω is not
derived from γιγνώσκω, but both come from the root γωνο. It has seemed best not
to introduce forms which are merely assumed in order to account for derivations,
as ἄγνοος, which is implied by ἀγνοέω, but is not found in actual use in Greek
authors. 

