VOCABULARY

THE Vocabulary gives the meanings of all words found in the text of this edition
of the first four books of the -4#zadasis. Since it is not a dictionary of the whole
Anabasis, a Multiplicity of citations, which tend only to confuse the pupil, has been
avoided.

The principal parts of all verbs, except those which offer no opportunity for
A hyphen prefixed to any word indicates that it is used
only in compounds, The parts of compound verbs are given only when the
simple verb is not listed in this vocabulary.

In explaining derivations, simplicity and clearness have been the aim. Many
cognate and borrowed words have been given both from English and Latin; some
of the borrowed words, however, are not borrowed directly from the Greek words
under which they are placed (cp. baptize under Badw7w), The editors have seen
in their own teaching that observation of related words not only quickens a pupil's
interest in Greck, but also aids him greatly in learning the meanings of words.
For assistance in understanding Greek, Latin, and English cognate forms, which
vary in their mutes (or stops) according to principles stated in the last century by
Jakob Grimm, the chief features of Grimm’s Law are here given. Vowel changes
follow no fixed law, and in fact there are numerous exceptions to the law of mute
changes.

error, are given in full.

GREEK LATIN ENGLISH
w (ous) =p (pes) =f (foot)
kK (xdwv) =¢ (canis) =h (hound)
(mr) _y (ree _ (mothe )
LAT Np ~ mater — mother
B (rvpBn) =6 (turba) =p  (thorp)
Y (vyévos) =g (genus) = (kin)
5 (dvo0) =d (duo) =f (two)
@ (Pépw) =f (fero) =6 (bear)
xX (x6pros) =A (hortus) =g (garden)
6 (Ovpa) =f Cforis) =d (door)

All Greek words used in
defined in the vocabulary immediately above or below.
ing derivations is preceded by the abbreviation ‘cp.,

explaining derivations are translated, unless they are
If a word used in explain-
the vocabulary-word is

not derived from it, but both are from the same root; for example, ayvoéw is not
derived from yryvwoKw, but both come from the root yvo. It has seemed best not
to introduce forms which are merely assumed in order to account for derivations,
as &yvoos, which is implied by éyvoéw, but is not found in actual use in Greek
authors. :

404

Google
